Millaiss painting represents the drowning Ophelia from Shakespeares Hamlet. Driven mad with grief after her father Polonius was murdered by Hamlet, her lover, she allows herself to die by falling into a stream. The flowers she holds are symbolic: the poppy means death, daisies innocence and pansies love in vain. The painting was regarded in its day as one of the most accurate and elaborate studies of nature ever made. The background was painted from life by the Hogsmill River in Surrey. Elizabeth Siddall posed for Ophelia in a bath of water kept warm by lamps underneath.
Fountain is the most famous of Duchamps so-called ready-made sculptures: ordinary manufactured objects designated by the artist as works of art. It epitomises the assault on convention and accepted notions of art for which Duchamp became known. The original, which is now lost, consisted of a standard urinal, laid flat on its back and signed with a pseudonym, R. Mutt 1917. This work is one of a small number of replicas which Duchamp authorised in 1964, based on a photograph of the original by Alfred Stieglitz.
Sierras works highlight the exploitation of human labour. He focuses on those who are most exploited and yet who remain least visible in official terms: illegal immigrants, asylum seekers, sex workers, drug addicts and poor, unemployed and homeless people. He employs such people to perform pointless or repetitive tasks that are often absurd or degrading.
The Sixties are often seen as a time when Britain emerged from the greyness of the postwar years into a period of optimism, youthfulness and colour. Few works exemplify this perception better than Hockneys depictions of Californian swimming pools. These evoke a glamorous and exotic life of sun and leisure. Frequently, Hockney populates these scenes with male figures but here only the splash suggests a human presence. The painting also reflects Hockneys concern with capturing in paint transparent materials and transient moments.
One of the worst atrocities of the Spanish Civil War was the bombing of the Basque town of Guernica by the German air force, lending their support to the Nationalist forces of General Franco. Picasso responded to the massacre by painting the vast mural Guernica, and for months afterwards he  made subsidiary paintings based on one  of the figures in the mural: a weeping woman holding her dead child. Weeping Woman is the last and most elaborate of the series. The womans features are based on Picassos lover Dora Maar.
Marilyn Monroe died in August 1962, having overdosed on barbiturates. In the following four months, Warhol made more than twenty silkscreen paintings of her, all based on the same publicity photograph from the 1953 film Niagara. Warhol found in Monroe a fusion of two of his consistent themes: death and the cult of celebrity. By repeating the image, he evokes her ubiquitous presence in the media. The contrast of vivid colour with black and white, and the effect of fading in the right panel are suggestive of the stars mortality.
According to Greek mythology, Narcissus fell in love with his own reflection in a pool. Unable to embrace the watery image, he pined away, and the gods immortalised him as a flower. Dal shows this metamorphosis by doubling a crouching figure by the lake with a hand clutching an egg, from which the narcissus flower sprouts. When this painting was first exhibited it was accompanied by a long poem by Dal. Together, the words and image suggest a range of emotions triggered by the theme of metamorphosis, including anxiety, disgust and desire.
Whaam! is based on an image from All American Men of War published by DC comics in 1962. Throughout the 1960s, Lichtenstein frequently drew on commercial art sources such as comic images or advertisements, attracted by the way highly emotional subject matter could be depicted using detached techniques. Transferring this to a painting context, Lichtenstein could present powerfully charged scenes in an impersonal manner, leaving the viewer to decipher meanings for themselves.
The Snail is one of the last and largest pieces in Matisses final series of works, known as cutouts. Confined to bed through illness, he had assistants paint sheets of paper in gouache which he then cut. The shell of a snail inspired the spiralling arrangement of roughly cut pieces of paper. Compared to his earlier paintings, Matisse believed that he had gained greater completeness and abstraction in the cutouts. I have attained a form filtered to its essentials, he remarked.
The title of this triptych refers to figures sometimes depicted at the foot of the cross in religious paintings. Bacon later related themto The Eumenides, vengeful furies of Greek myth. Typically, he drew on various sources, including photography. The works exhibition in April 1945 coincided with the release of the first photographs and film footage of the Nazi concentration camps. For some, Bacons triptych reflected the pessimistic world ushered in by the Holocaust and the advent of nuclear weapons.
This painting is a realisation of the tragic scene which concludes Alfred Tennysons poem The Lady of Shalott. Having defied the terms of her confinement, the heroine sets sail for Camelot and certain death. The picture may also have been intended as a tribute to Millaiss Ophelia, with broad impressionist brushwork replacing the precise treatment of the earlier Pre-Raphaelite work. Draped over the boat is the tapestry the Lady wove during her imprisonment. Beside it are three candles, often used to symbolise life. Two have blown out suggesting that her life will end soon, as she floats down the river.
This self-portrait appears to date from around 1799 when Turner was about twenty-four years old. It was possibly intended to mark an important moment in his career, his election as an Associate of the Royal Academy. Despite his relative youth, Turner had already made a name for himself as an original, accomplished painter with the technical abilities of someone more mature. He had been described in the newspapers as an artist who seems thoroughly to understand the mode of adjusting and applying his various materials and their effect in oil or on paper is equally sublime.
Hockney painted this portrait of his friends, the fashion designer Ossie Clark and Celia Birtwell, shortly after their marriage. Hockney, who was best man at their wedding, took great pains over this composition and painted Ossie's head at  least a dozen times. The couple modeled for the work on numerous occasions in Hockney's studio, although Ossie's pose was based on a snapshot taken one morning just after he had got out of bed, and before he had put on his shoes. Celia, a highly successful fabric designer in her own right, continued to act as Hockney's model and muse for many years.
This painting is set in a garden in the Cotswolds village of Broadway, where John Singer Sargent stayed in the summer of 1885. The children lighting Japanese lanterns with tapers are Dolly (left) and Polly Barnard. Their father was the illustrator Frederick Barnard  a friend of Sargents. Sargent wanted to capture the exact level of light at dusk so he painted the picture out of doors, in the impressionist manner. As autumn came and the flowers died he resorted to painting flowers in pots. The title comes from the refrain of a popular song The Wreath by Joseph Mazzinghi.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
In the early 1930s, Dal promoted the idea of the Surrealist object, of which this is a classic example. The Surrealists valued the mysterious and provocative effect of such unexpected conjunctions. Dal, in particular, believed that his objects could reveal the secret desires of the unconscious. Lobsters and telephones had strong sexual connotations for him, and he drew a close analogy between food and sex. He made Lobster Telephone for Edward James, the British collector who was the most active patron of Surrealist artists in the 1930s.
Each of Andres Equivalent series consists of a rectangular arrangement of 120 firebricks. Although the shape of each sculpture is different, they all have the same height, mass and volume, and are therefore equivalent to each other. Andres sculptures are often assembled using common industrial materials, which he arranges into a simple geometric pattern. His sculptures are always placed on the floor rather than on plinths. Not simply objects to look at, they become part of the environment, altering the viewers relationship to the surrounding space.
Mondrians interest lay in the abstract quality of line but by 1914 he had all but eliminated the curved line from his work. By 1916 he had suppressed any sense of a subject. Still later he developed a new form of rigorous abstraction called Neo-Plasticism in which he limited himself to straight, horizontal and vertical lines and basic primary colours. Typically his compositions were not symmetrical but could scarcely be purer in their elements. He felt this art reflected a greater, universal truth beyond everyday appearance.
The series of photographs called Signs... brought Wearing international recognition when it was first exhibited in 1993. This selection of five images shows the range of responses which Wearing elicited  from passers-by, whom she selected  at random, and asked to write their thoughts on a piece of paper. Wearing challenges social stereotypes and assumptions, and often works in collaboration with members of the  public as a means of 'interrupting the logic of photo-documentary and snapshot photography.' She has said 'A great  deal of my work is about questioning handed-down truths.'
Turner first saw Norham, bordering Scotland on the river Tweed in Northumberland, in 1797. He was at the limits of his trip to northern England, when he also visited Buttermere, seen in the painting of nearly fifty years earlier shown nearby. After that first visit he made watercolours showing the ruin at sunrise, and visits in 1801 and 1831 resulted in further views. Here, finally, is one of a series of unfinished, unexhibited paintings reworking his monochrome Liber Studiorum landscape prints. Pure colours rather than contrasting tones express the blazing light as the historic building and landscape merge.
This painting was inspired by the death of the artists son and the professional care of Dr Gustavus Murray who treated him. But this work shows the moment when a child shows the first sign of recovery. The light of dawn filters through the shutters behind the anxious parents who have sat up all night. In order to make the picture convincing, Fildes constructed a cottage interior in his studio and began work at dawn each day to catch the exact light effect. The image of an ordinary doctors quiet heroism was a huge success with the public.
The first oil painting Turner exhibited at the Royal Academy, this is a moonlit scene in the tradition of Horace Vernet, Philip de Loutherbourg and Joseph Wright of Derby. These painters were largely responsible for fuelling the 18th-century vogue for nocturnal subjects. The sense of the overwhelming power of nature is a key theme of the Sublime. The potency of the moonlight contrasts with the delicate vulnerability of the flickering lantern, emphasising natures power over mankind and the fishermens fate in particular. The jagged silhouettes on the left are the treacherous rocks called the Needles off the Isle of Wight.
No Woman No Cry is a tribute to the London teenager Stephen Lawrence. The Metropolitan police investigation into his racially motivated murder was mishandled, and a subsequent inquiry described the police force as institutionally racist. In each of the tears shed by the woman in the painting is a collaged image of Stephen Lawrences face, while the words R.I.P. Stephen Lawrence are just discernible beneath the layers of paint. Despite these specific references, the artist also intended the painting to be read in more general terms, as a universal portrayal of melancholy and grief.
Gallery label, February 2004
In 1947, Klein began making monochrome paintings, which he associated with freedom from ideas of representation or personal expression. A decade later, he developed his trademark, patented colour, International Klein Blue (IKB). This colour, he believed, had a quality close to pure space, and he associated it with immaterial values beyond what can be seen or touched. He described it as a Blue in itself, disengaged from all functional justification. Klein made around 200 monochrome paintings using IKB. He did not give titles to these works but, after his death, his widow assigned a number to each one.
Hunts modern life painting represents a wealthy man visiting his mistress in an apartment which he has provided for her. The tune that he idly plays on the piano has reminded her of her earlier life and she rises from his lap towards the bright outside world (made visible to the viewer in the mirror). The claustrophobic space is filled with intricate clues, such as the bird trying to escape from a cat and the female figure enclosed in a glass dome, which echoes the shape of the painting.
The jagged forms of Three Dancers convey an explosion of energy. The image is laden with Picassos personal recollections of a triangular affair, which resulted in the heart-broken suicide of his friend Carlos Casagemas. Love, sex and death are linked in an ecstatic dance. The left-hand dancer in particular seems possessed by uncontrolled, Dionysian frenzy. Her face relates to a mask from Torres Strait, New Guinea, owned by the artist, and points to Picassos association of primitive forms with expressiveness and sexuality.
Liquid Crystal Environment consists of five projectors, each with a single slide containing liquid crystals. The projectors are equipped with rotating polarising filters and a cooling and heating system that cause the liquid crystal to liquefy or freeze, creating psychedelic effects of shifting colour and form.
For Turner, the figure of Hannibal  here leading his armies to attack Italy  had powerful associations with Napoleon. These connections had been explicitly drawn in an official portrait of Napoleon about to lead his own armies across the St Bernard Pass. Snow Storm, however, does not celebrate the power of the individual, but expresses mans vulnerability in the face of natures overwhelming force. Hannibal himself is not pictured, and attention is focused upon victims of the conflict, the struggling soldiers.
Nan Goldin describes her photographs as a 'visual diary'. She has stated: 'These are my friends, these are my family, this is myself. There is no separation between me and what I photograph.' The self-portrait Nan one month after being battered was taken to prevent Goldin from forgetting the damage caused by her boyfriend's violence. She applies the same frankness to the lives of her close friends. Goldin is attracted to the glamour of the world of drag-queens and transvestites. In Jimmy Paulette and Taboo! Undressing, NYC 1991, two men are caught in the midst of their gender transformation. Characteristically, this moment of exposure is presented with candour and empathy.
Picasso first began to make collages in 1912. The use of cut papers, and in particular clippings from newspapers, seemed a natural extension of his earlier experiments with stencilled lettering. Whereas his earlier cubist works had involved deconstructing objects into their component parts, works like this one sought to construct a unified composition from abstracted fragments of the objects depicted. The newspaper in this work may have been chosen for its faded colour, since it was already nearly thirty years old when Picasso used it.
In this work, painted a year before 

his father's death, Hockney's style has shifted towards a closer study of human behaviour. His mother poses, attentive and graceful, while his father, who fidgeted during sittings, was painted reading Aaron Scharf's book Art and Photography. A book on Chardin draws 

a parallel with intimate domestic scenes of the past, as do the volumes of Proust's Remembrance of Things Past visible on the shelf. Piero della Francesca's Baptism of Christ (now in the National Gallery; 

see below) is reflected in the mirror, forming a triptych with the two figures.
While this appears to be a glass of water on a shelf, the artist states that it is in fact an oak tree. Craig-Martins assertion addresses fundamental questions about what we understand to be art and our faith in the power of the artist. The work can be seen as an exploration of Marcel Duchamps declaration that any existing object can be declared a work of art. In his accompanying text, Craig-Martin provides the questions as well as the answers, allowing the simultaneous expression of scepticism and belief regarding the transformative power of art.
Richard Dadd painted this work in the Bethlem Hospital (now the Imperial War Museum) where he was sent after murdering his father and declared insane. The scene was drawn from imagination and shows the fairy-feller poised to split a large chestnut which will be used to construct Queen Mabs new fairy carriage. The style, subject and shifting scale of the painting all contribute to a sense of the fantastic that fits the critic Herbert Reads idea of an imaginative tradition running through to Surrealism in the early 20th century.
The central rotund shape in this painting derives from a photograph of a Sudanese corn-bin, which Ernst has transformed into a sinister mechanical monster. Ernst often re-used found images, and either added or removed elements in order to create new realities, all the more disturbing for being drawn from the known world. The works title comes from a childish German rhyme that begins: The elephant from Celebes has sticky, yellow bottom grease. The paintings inexplicable combinations, such as the headless female figure and the elephant-like creature, suggest images from a dream and the Freudian technique of free association.
Warhol began using the image of the electric chair in 1963, the same year as the two final executions in New York State. Over the next decade, he repeatedly returned to the subject, reflecting the political controversy surrounding the death penalty in America in the 1960s. The chair, and its brutal reduction of life to nothingness, is given a typically deadpan presentation by Warhol. The image of an unoccupied electric chair in an empty execution chamber becomes a poignant metaphor for death.
Hausmann, a founder member of the Berlin Dada group, developed photomontage as a tool of satire and political protest. Although the 'art critic' is identified by a stamp as George Grosz, another member of the group, the image was probably an anonymous figure cut from a magazine. The fragment of a German banknote behind the critics neck suggests that he is controlled by capitalist forces. The words in the background are part of a poem poster made by Hausmann to be pasted on the walls of Berlin.
Pistoletto was interested in broadening the material language of Arte Povera, and in creating complex juxtapositions of modern and historical images and ideas. Venus of the Rags appears to bring together an iconic figure of classical culture with the detritus of contemporary society as the solid Roman goddess props up a randomly formed pile of gaudily coloured second-hand clothes. In fact the figure is based on a kitsch statue found in a garden centre rather than a genuine antiquity.
The model for this sculpture was a ballet student. Degas first made a reddish-brown wax sculpture of her in the nude. Then, aiming for a naturalistic effect, he dressed it in clothing made of real fabrics. When the wax sculpture was first exhibited, contemporaries were shocked by the unprecedented realism of the piece. But they were also moved by the works representation of the pain and stress of ballet training endured by a barely adolescent girl. After Degas death, his heirs decided to make bronze casts of the wax original.
If portraiture is intended to communicate something unique about its subject, Five Day Forecast might be described as an anti-portrait. The economy of the images, their serial arrangement and the use of black and white recall the conventions of nineteenth-century ethnographic photography, in which the subject becomes a de-individualised representative of a wider group. But in Simpsons work, rather than being available for scrutiny and categorisation, the figure is photographed cropped so only her torso is visible. In this way, she remains ultimately inaccessible to the viewer.
This scene of a dreary hotel corridor appears haunted by unnatural forces. The oversized sunflower on the landing is strangely animated. A life-size doll leans in a doorway while the long hair of a girl stands on end, blown by the wind. These unexpected elements suggest childhood fantasies and nightmares, and echo elements of the Gothic novels that Tanning loved. The title, A Little Night Music, is borrowed from one of Mozarts most light-hearted chamber works and appears to be used ironically.
This work was made during a holiday at the fishing port of Collioure in the south of France in 1905, when Matisse and Derain painted portraits of each other. Under Matisses influence, Derain had begun to use strong, non-naturalistic colours, applied in small separate brushstrokes, to convey the sensations of light and shade. Their radical use of colour led critics described them and their associates as Fauves or wild beasts, and Fauvism became an important parallel to the rise of Expressionism in Germany.
This is the first scene in a series of three on the consequences of adultery. A woman lies at her husbands feet. He holds a letter, evidence of her unfaithfulness, and stamps on a portrait miniature of her lover. On the left, the house of cards collapses, signifying the breakdown of the family unit. Beneath the cards is a novel by the French writer Balzac, famous for his tales of adultery. The apple in the centre has been cut in two. One half, representing the wife, has fallen to the floor. The other, representing the husband, has been stabbed to the core.
The Tates The Kiss is one of three full-scale versions made in Rodins lifetime. Its blend of eroticism and idealism makes it one of the great images of sexual love. However, Rodin considered it overly traditional, calling The Kiss a large sculpted knick-knack following the usual formula. The couple are the adulterous lovers Paolo Malatesta and Francesca da Rimini, who were slain by Francescas outraged husband. They appear in Dantes Inferno, which describes how their passion grew as they read the story of Lancelot and Guinevere together. The book can just be seen in Paolos hand.
In this radical reinterpretation of the Annunciation in which the angel announces to Mary that she will give birth to the Christ child, Rossetti sought a supernatural realism. Rejecting the tradition of representing the Virgin passively receiving the news, he shows her recoiling on her bed as if disturbed from sleep. Rossetti used white as the dominant colour to symbolise feminine purity, complemented by blue, a colour traditionally associated with Mary, and red, for Christs blood. The artists sister Christina posed for the Virgin and his brother William Michael for the angel.
In carrying out this reconstruction of The Large Glass, Richard Hamilton deliberately avoided making a copy that acknowledged its fifty years of ageing and deterioration. Instead he set out to make it as it was conceived, accepting that it would similarly change to some extent with the passage of time. Rather than simply working from photographs of the completed work, Hamilton used the notes and drawings of The Green Box to closely follow Duchamps original process of creation. By doing this, thirteen years of work were compressed into nearly as many months. As Hamilton recalled after finishing the project, mental effort was exerted only in the direction of detective work, deductions from signs marking a path to be followed  the creative anguish was erased from the trail. When Duchamp came to London for the opening of his exhibition in 1966, he agreed to sign the reconstruction and the four glass studies produced by Hamilton, inscribing on the back pour copie conforme (for a faithful replica).
This portrait of the photographer Dora Maar was painted on 5 May 1944. Her reconfigured features may reflect the complex atmosphere of the final weeks of the Nazi Occupation of Paris. Deprivation and tension remained high in the city. In February two of Picassos closest Jewish friends  the poets Robert Desnos and Max Jacob  had been deported. Yet there were also signs of defiance and hope: in March, Maar took part alongside Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir in a clandestine performance of Picassos play Desire Caught by the Tail, directed by Albert Camus.
In 1959, Fontana began to cut the canvas, with dramatic perfection. These cuts (or tagli) were carefully pre-meditated but executed in an instant. Like the holes in some of his other canvases, they have the effect of drawing the viewer into space. In some, however, the punctures erupt from the surface carrying the force of the gesture towards the viewer in a way that is at once energetic and threatening. Although these actions have often been seen as violent, Fontana claimed I have constructed, not destroyed.
Gallaccio is known for her work with organic materials such as ice, flowers, fruits and sugar. Her installations often change over time as they melt, decompose or sprout new life. In preserve beauty 2000 gerberas are sandwiched between huge panes of glass and left to wither and rot. Gallaccio has described gerberas as a disposable commodity, mass-produced all year round. Her work challenges romantic ideas of nature and culture, life and death. This was first displayed in the window of a London gallery, where it became a metaphor for Gallaccios perception of the male-dominated art scene.
Throughout his life, Warhol played up his unusual looks and pale complexion to startling effect. His last self-portraits, made in the year before his death, draw particular attention to his exaggerated wig. Warhol understood the importance of image in contemporary life, and established himself in the public eye as the most famous Pop artist. His public persona was as much a construct as his paintings, and over the years he created numerous self-portraits in a variety of guises. If you want to know all about Andy Warhol, just look at the surface: of my paintings and films and me, and there I am, he famously said. Theres nothing behind it.
By adding a row of nails, Man Ray transformed a household flat-iron into a new and potentially threatening object. The nails and burning metal suggest a violent eroticism at odds with the works title, the French word for gift. The original version, given to the composer Erik Satie, was lost but became well-known through Man Rays photograph of it. Although made at the height of Paris dada, Cadeau, like Man Rays other objects, anticipated the exposure of hidden desires found in subsequent surrealist objects.
Since 1976 Richter has concentrated on abstraction, developing a series of systematic approaches to making paintings. He began this work with a brightly coloured, predominantly red composition divided vertically into four sections. He then drew paint across the canvas using long batons edged in flexible plastic. By over-painting, scraping and scratching into the surface he destroyed the previous composition and created a new painting. Richter has stated that abstract paintings visualise a reality which we can neither see nor describe but which we may nevertheless conclude to exist.
In the 1950s, Johns began using flags, targets and numbers as the basis of his paintings. These were ordinary familiar things, but also had an iconic, emblematic quality. This work is one of a series that he undertook in the summer of 1960, using the superimposed numbers 0 to 9. Johns let the process of painting the number sequence dictate the structure of the painting. This allowed him  to concentrate on the qualities of the paint itself, exploring colour and thickness. The result is a highly abstract structure, but one rooted firmly  in the real world.
Following the Surrealist tradition, Lucas places familiar objects in shocking

or unexpected arrangements. Many of these exploit the sexual innuendo that is

a key feature of popular British comedy, from Carry On films to Viz magazine. 

In this photograph, the humour has a troubling edge. Displaying a plucked chicken in place of a young woman''s genitals, Lucas hints at the violation and gender stereotyping that underlies such jokes.
In the classical myth Proserpine was kidnapped by Pluto, the god of the underworld, to be his wife. She begged to be returned to earth, but because she had eaten some pomegranate seeds Pluto confined her to his kingdom for half of each year. She is shown here eating a pomegranate which symbolises captivity. Jane Morris modelled for Proserpine. She was married to Dante Gabriel Rossettis friend William Morris and was also Rossettis lover. She was unhappy in her marriage and Rossetti may also have seen her as a captive goddess.
Kandinsky believed that abstract paintings could convey spiritual and emotional values simply through the arrangement of colours and lines. Cossacks was made during a transitional period, when he retained some representational
elements, such as the two Russian cavalrymen in tall orange hats in the foreground of the painting. Kandinsky considered these as points at which the images could be registered, rather than the true content of the painting.
This work is generally considered one in a series of Black Triptychs which followed the suicide of Bacons lover, George Dyer. Dyer appears on the left and Bacon is on the right. The central group is derived from a photograph of wrestlers by Edward Muybridge, but also suggests a more sexual encounter. The seated figures and their coupling are set against black voids and the central flurry has been seen as a life-and death struggle. The artists biographer wrote: What death has not already consumed seeps incontinently out of the figures as their shadows.
This is one of the earliest works in which Moore shows the female figure undulating like the landscape. It was commissioned by the architect Serge Chermayeff to stand on the terrace of his home on the Downs. Visually, the figure would have acted as a bridge between the rolling hills and the ultra-modern house. Moore, like others, used many native British stones at this time. This Hornton stone came from a quarry near Banbury in Oxfordshire.
This picture was exhibited with words from the Old Testament, often seen as prefiguring Christs Crucifixion: And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then shall he answer. Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. Millais based the setting on a real carpenters shop. Symbols of the Crucifixion figure prominently: the wood, the nails, the cut in Christs hand and the blood on his foot. Millais was viciously attacked in the press for showing the holy family as ordinary. Charles Dickens described Christ as a hideous, wry-necked, blubbering, red-haired boy in a night-gown.
This illustrates Titania's instruction to her 

fairy train in the last scene of Shakespeare's 

A Midsummer Night's Dream:
These collages are mainly made from magazines given to Paolozzi by American ex-servicemen. They show his fascination with popular culture and technology, as well as with the glamour of American consumerism. The title of the series refers to Henry Ford''s famous statement that ''History is more or less bunk.... We want to live in the present''. It reflects Paolozzi''s belief that his work should respond to contemporary culture.
The Uncertainty of the Poet 

De Chiricos quiet square evokes the classical arcades and statuary of antiquity (the sculpture is a torso of Aphrodite). In contrast, the passing train and perishable bananas suggest a sense of the contemporary and immediate. The distorted perspective and shadows undermine the conventions of pictorial space and time. De Chiricos early works were enthusiastically embraced by the Surrealists, who saw in them a dream-like parallel existence. The poet Paul Eluard wrote: these squares are outwardly similar to existing squares and yet we have never seen them ... We are in an immense, previously inconceivable, world.
The unknown woman in this portrait is seated in classical robes by a statue of Minerva, the goddess of wisdom. The book upon the table and the writing materials in her hand suggest that she is a writer. Angelica Kauffmanns interest in classical portraiture and history painting was nurtured during her time in Italy during the 1760s. Kauffmann, who was Swiss by birth, settled in England in 1766, remaining there until 1781, when she departed once more for Italy. In England Kauffmann specialised in decorative history painting and small scale portraits of female subjects, such as the one shown here.
Ordinary objects  a bottle and fishes on a plate, laid on a table with a drawer  have been dramatically fragmented to form a grid-like structure of interpenetrating planes. The traditional domestic subject matter and sober colours in this work can be seen as a reaction against the luminous hues and free expression of Braques earlier fauvist paintings.
Morriss Minimalist sculptures of the mid-1960s consist of rigorously pared down geometric forms. He typically arranged these into situations where one is aware of ones own body at the same time that one is aware of the piece. This work demonstrates the principle. As the viewer walks around the four cubes, their mirrored surfaces produce complex and shifting interactions between gallery and spectator. The cubes were originally installed in the garden at Tate for Morriss 1971 exhibition, but were put on show in the galleries when the exhibition had to be re-made with substitute works.
Riley often alludes to her impressions of foreign cultures in her paintings. In 1981 she travelled to India. Nataraja is a term from Hindu mythology meaning Lord of the Dance. It refers to the Hindu God Shiva in his form as the cosmic dancer, who is usually depicted with many arms. In this painting, vertical bands of colour are cut across by diagonals, creating a sense of dynamic movement through intricate rhythm and counter-rhythm.
This painting, the title of which is German for dead sea, was inspired by a dump of wrecked aircraft at Cowley in Oxfordshire. Nash based the image on photographs he took there, a few of which are on display nearby.The artist described the sight: The thing looked to me suddenly, like a great inundating sea ... the breakers rearing up and crashing on the plain. And then, no: nothing moves, it is not water or even ice, it is something static and dead.
Landscape painting flourished in the 19th century, ranging from the epic, through rustic nostalgia to the naturalism championed by John Constable. He based what he called his natural painture on study of nature, experience of his subjects and attention to working life, especially in the Stour Valley where his father was a miller and merchant. When possible, he sketched or worked on pictures outdoors. Flatford Mill shows barges approaching Flatford footbridge after passing through the lock near his fathers mill. Its bright, airy realism was unprecedented at the time.
Dine believes that tools provide a 'link with our past, the human past, the hand'. They feature in many of his works, and can be seen as a symbol of artistic creation. There is also an autobiographical resonance, as Dine's family owned a hardware store in Cincinnati. In these prints, the tools are presented as a series of discrete items, as if laid out for analysis and classification.
Painted just after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, this work shows a couple locked in a cannibalistic embrace. They are pictured on a table-top, which merges into the earthy tones of a Spanish landscape in the background. The conflict between countrymen is symbolised by the apple balanced on the head of the male figure, which refers to the legend of William Tell, in which a father is forced to shoot at his son.
Shipwrecks and other disasters at sea were a recurrent theme in Romantic painting. They demonstrated the primal force of the elements, a nightmare for all who travelled far from home. Turner retained a lifelong passion for the sea. We dont know whether this painting was inspired by an actual shipwreck, or the reissue in 1804 of a famous poem on the theme by William Falconer. Turner defines the essence of such an experience through overwhelming impressions of realism and horror. The dark tonality, characteristic of Turners early paintings, provides a foil to the white crests and swirls of the waves.
Whistler painted this view from Battersea Bridge looking across the Thames towards Chelsea. The tower of Chelsea Old Church is just visible on the right, and a fisherman stands in the foreground looking out to a low barge. It was the first of Whistlers series of nocturnes: paintings intended to convey a sense of the beauty and tranquillity of the River Thames in the evening or by night. The influence of Japanese woodblock prints is evident from the relatively small range of colours and the butterfly device at the lower centre, which Whistler used as his signature.
This large-scale bronze spider carries a granite egg in her sack, revealing Bourgeoiss interest in the creature as an image of the strong mother: protector, creator and repairer. In 1995 Bourgeois wrote a poem about her mother, who died when the artist was young. She compares her to a spider, because my best friend was my mother and she was deliberate, clever, patient, soothing, reasonable, dainty, subtle, indispensable, neat, and useful as an araigne [spider]. She could also defend herself, and me
Meireles altered a series of Coca-Cola bottles, by printing slogans such as Yankees go home or instructions for making Molotov cocktails on them. He put them back into circulation in what he described as an act of subversive mobile graffiti, enacted under Brazils military dictatorship. He saw the system of recycling empty bottles as a way of enabling a political message to circulate surreptitiously. He has compared the Coca-Cola bottles to messages in bottles, flung into the sea by victims of shipwrecks.
Gallery label, April 2005
Pelagos (sea in Greek) was inspired by a view of the bay at St Ives in Cornwall, where two arms of land enfold the sea on either side. The hollowed-out wood has a spiral formation resembling a shell, a wave or the roll of a hill. Hepworth wanted the taut strings to express the tension I felt between myself and the sea, the wind or the hills. She moved to Cornwall with her husband Ben Nicholson in 1939, and produced some of her finest sculpture in its wild landscape.
The title of Swinging conveys the paintings sense of dynamic movement, suggestive of the rhythms of modernity. One of the pioneers of abstract painting, Kandinsky championed a mystical approach to art. His treatise Concerning the Spiritual in Art, published in 1911, argued for art that was purified from all references to the material world. He felt that colour in particular was essential for liberating art from naturalistic appearances.
This painting forms part of a triptych of judgement pictures inspired by the description of the Last Judgement in the final book of the New Testament, the book of Revelation. In The Great Day of His Wrath, Martins apocalyptic vision closely follows the Biblical account: there was a great earthquake and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair and the moon became as blood. And the heaven departed as a scroll... and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. The earth crashes in on itself, underlining the futility of mankinds attempts to resist the will of God.
Millaiss painting shows Mariana from Shakespeares play Measure for Measure. She leads a solitary life, rejected by her fianc Angelo after her dowry was lost in a shipwreck. But she is still in love and longs for him. Marianas tired pose, her embroidery, and the fallen leaves suggest the burden of her yearning as time passes. The painting was originally exhibited with lines from Alfred Tennysons poem Mariana: She only said, My life is dreary He cometh not! she said; She said, I am aweary, awearyI would that I were dead!
Rossettis inspiration was Dantes La Vita Nuova (The New Life), which explores the Italian poets idealised love for Beatrice and her premature death. As an omen of death, a bird drops a white poppy between her open hands. In the background the ghostly Dante gazes towards the figure of Love. Rossetti viewed this as a memorial to his wife and the model for Beatrice, Elizabeth Siddall, who had died in 1862. Rossetti had buried the manuscripts of his unpublished poems including On the Vita Nuova of Dante with his wife but, in a macabre twist, retrieved and published them in 1870.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
Traditionally the figure of Hope is represented by an anchor. Seeking a more original approach to symbolism and allegory, Watts shows her blindfolded, seated on a globe and playing a lyre of which all the strings are broken except one. Hopes attempt to make music appears futile and several critics argued that the work might have been more appropriately titled Despair. Watts explained that Hope need not mean expectancy. It suggests here rather the music which can come from the remaining chord.
Dijkstra decided to make these portraits after witnessing the birth of a friends baby. She photographed three women, one hour (Julie), one day (Tecla) and one week (Saskia) after giving birth. The raw immediacy of these images captures something of the contradictions inherent in this common and yet most singular of human experiences. The women appear at once vulnerable and invincible, traumatised and self-composed.
This painting is dominated by Battersea Bridge, with Chelsea Old Church and the lights of the newly-built Albert Bridge just visible in the background. The Thames has long signified the condition and power of London. Whistler, however, does not portray the riverside crowded with factories, warehouses, wharves and mills, but the atmospheric effects of the water in the evening. He wrote when the evening mist clothes the riverside with poetry...tall chimneys become campanili [bell towers] and the warehouses are palaces in the night and the whole city hangs in the heavens and fairy land is before us.
In 1947 Lucian Freud fell in love with Kitty Garman, daughter of Kathleen Garman and Jacob Epstein, and the subject of eight portraits by Freud that chart their short marriage. In this closely-cropped composition, the kitten - serving as a namesake for Garman - is gripped tightly by the neck as it stares straight ahead, while Garman averts her gaze. Girl with a Kitten shows the way that Freud sought to embody character, rather than just illustrate likeness, and to create a sense of dramatic tension.
Bellmers fetishistic Doll sculptures were partly inspired by Jacques Offenbachs opera The Tales of Hoffmann, in which the hero falls in love with a mechanical doll. Photographs of the doll were published in 1934 in the surrealist journal Minotaure. With their explorations of voyeurism and sadism, the photographs soon became as important as the sculpture itself. This hand-coloured image shows the second doll, completed in 1935, which Bellmer depicted in different stages of dismemberment in over a hundred scenarios. Shown here with no arms or legs, hanging from a tree, the doll suggests the aftermath of torture or abuse.
In the early years of the twentieth century, industrialisation swept across Italy. The futurist movement was founded by writers and artists like Umberto Boccioni, who enthused about new inventions such as cars and electricity. In Unique Forms of Continuity in Space, the figure is aerodynamically deformed by speed. Boccioni exaggerated the bodys dynamism so that it embodied the urge towards progress. The sculpture may reflect ideas of the mechanised body that appeared in futurist writings, as well as the superman envisaged by the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche.
Like other artists of her generation, Holzer  turned to the strategies of the mass media and advertising in her work. In the late 1970s, she devised nearly 300 aphorisms or slogans, which play on commonly held truths and clichs. Initially, the Truisms were infiltrated into the public arena via stickers, T-shirts and posters. Later, Holzer started using electronic displays. In 1982 she  blazed these messages across a giant advertising  hoarding in Times Square, New York. The Truisms are deliberately challenging, presenting a spectrum of often-contradictory opinions. Holzer hoped they would sharpen people's awareness of the 'usual baloney they are fed' in daily life.
This work belongs to the remarkable sequence of portraits that Picasso made of Marie-Thrse Walter at his country property at Boisgeloup. Marie-Thrse is presented here  as in most of her portraits  as a series of sensuous curves. Even the scrolling arms of the chair have been heightened and exaggerated to echo the rounded forms of her body. The face is a double or metamorphic image: the right side can also be seen as the face of a lover in profile, kissing her on the lips.
This was voted Picture of the Year at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition of 1927 and bought for the nation by the Daily Mail newspaper. From about 1922 Dod Procter had begun to paint a series of simple, monumental portraits of young women that she knew, utilising the fall of light across the figures to give a powerful sense of volume. The model was Cissie Barnes, the sixteen year old daughter of a fisherman from Newlyn, the Cornish village that was home to Dod Procter for most of her working life. The popularity of this painting led to its being displayed in New York, followed by a tour of Britain from 1927 to 1929.
The Sick Child touches on the fragility of life. It draws upon Munchs personal memories, including the trauma of his sisters death, and visits to dying patients with his doctor father. He described the 1885 painting as a breakthrough in my art and made several subsequent versions, of which this is the fourth.

Acquired by the city of Dresden in 1928, it was displayed in the Gemldegalerie. A decade later, the Nazis declared that Munchs art was degenerate and, in November 1938, all his works in German public collections were collected in Berlin for auction. The Norwegian dealer Harald Holst Halvorsen secured as many as possible, including The Sick Child, and returned them safely to Oslo. Thomas Olsen bought the painting in 1939 and gave it to the Tate. Norway fell to the Germans in 1940. Looking back, Olsen explained that his gift was stimulated by my knowledge, from talks with Munch, that he felt the need of recognition in Western Europe, especially so after the advent of Hitler.
Hogarth began this self-portrait in the mid-1730s. X-rays have revealed that initially it showed the artist in a formal coat and wig. He later changed these to the more informal cap and clothes seen here. The oval canvas containing Hogarths portrait appears propped up on volumes of Shakespeare, Swift and Milton, authors who inspired Hogarths commitment to drama, satire and epic poetry. On his palette is the Line of Beauty and Grace, which underpinned Hogarths theories on art. Hogarths pug dog, Trump, serves as an emblem of the artists own pugnacious character. This portrait acted as a statement of the artists professional ambition.
These prints show drawings of Bourgeoiss hands and those of Jerry Gorovoy, her assistant for over thirty years. The title refers to the daily time of Gorovoys arrival at Bourgeoiss studio or house. She was particularly fascinated by the physical contrast between her small hands and the large hands of Jerry Gorovoy.
In all her object paintings, Milroy presents things in their most characteristic profile, side on or from above, depending on the objects concerned. They are alienated from any context, set against a neutral, most frequently white ground. This absorbs the shadows and contrasts with the objects' three-dimensionality, allowing an ambiguity in the viewer's relation to the object. They can be seen equally as placed on the floor or hung vertically on a wall. Our perception of them as objects diminishes as our appreciation of their abstract qualities and their serial ordering increases.
Spencer believed that the divine rested in all creation. He saw his home village of Cookham as a paradise in which everything was invested with mystical significance. The local churchyard here becomes the setting for the resurrection of the dead. Christ is enthroned in the church porch, cradling three babies, with God the Father standing behind. Spencer himself appears near the centre, naked, leaning against a grave stone; his fiance Hilda lies sleeping in a bed of ivy. At the top left, risen souls are transported to Heaven in the pleasure steamers that then ploughed the Thames.
Man Pointing was made very rapidly for Giacomettis first exhibition in New York. He recalled: I did that piece in one night between midnight and nine the next morning. That is, Id already done it, but I demolished it and did it all over again because the men from the foundry were coming to take it away. And when they got here, the plaster was still wet. It was originally intended to be part of a larger composition, with the left arm positioned loosely around a second figure. Giacometti later abandoned the idea, and considered Man Pointing to be a complete work.
During the 1920s Sutherland produced a series  of prints and drawings directly inspired by the example of Samuel Palmer. The series culminated in this work, whose simplified forms and detailed technique recall Palmer. However, the strange shadows and bizarrely gnarled and twisted  tree trunks strike a more personal note. Here Sutherland transforms the Palmeresque evocation of an Arcadian idyll into a more pagan image, replacing traditional Christian symbolism with animistic forces. The sense of brooding drama seen here was developed in Sutherland's landscape paintings of the late 1930s and  early 1940s.
Malevichs abstract paintings belong to the intense period of artistic experimentation that coincided with the 1917 Revolution in Russia. He abandoned representative images in favour of what he called Suprematism in 1915. In these works he used severely reduced geometrical forms  most famously a black square on a white canvas  whose meditative quality served as secular equivalents to Russian icons. He soon moved towards greater energy in paintings such as Dynamic Suprematism in which forms pull and push without relying on any reference to the physical world.
One evening in autumn 1940, Moore 

took cover from an air raid in Belsize Park underground station. Looking around 

at the people sheltering there, he became 'fascinated by the sight of people camping out deep under ground'. On returning 

to his studio he made some drawings from memory. When Kenneth Clark, chairman 

of the War Artists Advisory Committee, 

saw the pictures he commissioned 

further drawings and appointed Moore 

as an official war artist.
Francis Bacon painted directly onto the raw, unprimed side of the canvas and here emphasised the texture further by rubbing sand into the paint. He often based his paintings on a variety of photographic images and one source for the figure here may be a film still from Soviet director Sergei Eisensteins Battleship Potemkin (1925) in which an elderly nurse wearing cracked glasses opens her mouth in a silent scream. Bacon was fascinated by the expressive power of the mouth.
This is one of a series of self-portraits that Warhol made in 196667, all based on the same photograph. His likeness remains recognisable but the image is painted in such a way as to minimise Warhols human qualities. His facial features, although always identifiable, also act as patterns of densely layered colour. Any expressive paint handling is suppressed by the silkscreened surface, reflecting Warhols self-proclaimed intention to completely remove all the hand gesture from art and become noncommittal, anonymous.
Naum Gabo was associated with the Constructivists  at the time of the Russian Revolution of 1917.  They saw an artistic renewal as part of the  revolution and embraced new scientific theories  and industrial materials. A method known as  'stereometric construction' was central to Gabo's  work, by which form was achieved through the  description of space rather than the establishment  of mass. He declared in 1920: 'we take four planes  and we construct with them the same volume as of  four tons of mass.' In 1915-20 Gabo used planes to  construct heads and figures that demonstrated the  application of this method to traditional  subjects. 'Head No.2' is a later enlargement of  the most dramatic of these models.
In 1950, at the age of 62, Albers began what would become his signature series, the Homage to the Square. Over the next 26 years, until his death in 1976, he produced hundreds of variations on the basic compositional scheme of three or four squares set inside each other, with the squares slightly gravitating towards the bottom edge. What may at first appear to be a very narrow conceptual framework reveals itself as one of extraordinary perceptual complexity. In 1965, he wrote of the series: They all are of different palettes, and, therefore, so to speak, of different climates. Choice of the colours used, as well as their order, is aimed at an interaction - influencing and changing each other forth and back. Thus, character and feeling alter from painting to painting without any additional hand writing or, so-called, texture. Though the underlying symmetrical and quasi-concentric order of squares remains  the same in all paintings  in proportion and placement  these same squares group or single themselves, connect  and separate in many different ways.
Nevinson aligned himself with the Italian futurists who celebrated and embraced the violence and mechanised speed of the modern age. But his experience as an ambulance driver in the First World War changed his view. In his paintings of the Front, the soldiers are reduced to a series of angular planes and grey colouring. Here, they appear almost like machines themselves, losing their individuality, even their humanity, as they seem to fuse with the machine gun which gives this painting its title.
This highly romanticised picture created a sensation when it was first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1856. Thomas Chatterton was a poet whose gothic writings, melancholy life and youthful suicide fascinated artists and writers of the 19th century. At an early age, he wrote fake medieval histories and poems, which he copied onto old parchment and passed off as manuscripts from the Middle Ages. The fraud was later discovered. In London he struggled to earn a living writing tales and songs for popular publications. Penniless, he took his own life by swallowing arsenic at the age of 17.
As an example of rational thought, Newton was an important figure for Lavater. Arguing for the veracity of physiognomy, Lavater stated that greatness was visible in every well drawn outline of the scientists head. Reiterating a pervasive racial stereotype, he asked Could the mind of Newton have invented the theory of light, residing in the head of a Negro.  

Blake, however, was critical of reductive scientific thought. In this picture, the straight lines and sharp angles of Newtons profile suggest that he cannot see beyond the rules of his compass. Behind him, the colourful, textured rock may be seen to represent the creative world, to which he is blind.
This is one of several works in which Bourgeois reassembled doors and windowpanes to form small cells. The large marble eyes and the mirrors in this cell indicate that Bourgeois was thinking about voyeurism and surveillance. The mirrors reflect each other and the eyes in an endlessly probing insular circuit.
Peace shows the burial at sea of Turners friend, the artist David Wilkie. The cool palette and saturated blacks create a striking contrast to its pair, War, hung alongside, and convey the calm of Wilkies dignified death, compared to Napoleons disgrace. The two titles War and Peace are illustrated as abstract concepts, via tone and colour, rather than as actual events. Both works were roundly criticised at the time for their lack of finishing.
This sculptural installation was made by making a cast of the underside of a wooden floor, using polyester resin. Like many of Whitereads sculptures, it draws attention to an architectural space that is familiar yet overlooked. The uneven marks and cracks visible on the surfaces of the blocks record the traces of human life that are preserved on the original floor. Explaining her decision to use polyester resin, Whiteread explained that she wanted to make a work that had an inherent transparency so that its internal as well as its external structure could be revealed.
Patrick Caulfields paintings explore alternative ways of picturing the world. After Lunch was one of his earliest works to combine different styles of representation. In this case, what appears to be a photomural of the Chteau de Chillon hanging in a restaurant is depicted with high-focus realism, contrasting with the cartoon-like black-outlined imagery and fields of saturated colour of its surroundings. Caulfield deliberately makes the relationship between these varying representational methods uneasy and ambiguous, so that the picture appears more real than the everyday world around it.
This sculpture is named after Kapoors son Ishan, but also refers to Annas Light (1968), an abstract work by the American painter Barnett Newman. Kapoor combines saturated colours and contrasting materials to create sculptures that absorb or reflect light or sound to modify the viewers sense of space and create an almost immersive experience. Here the deep blood red colour and enveloping form of Ishis Light combine to suggest warmth and security.
In this series Sherman radically alters her appearance using make-up, hairstyles, hats and different facial expressions. She has explained, I made [them] to show the process of turning one character into another. At that time I was merely interested in the use of make-up on a face as paint used on a blank canvas. Shermans self-transformation, combining evident staging with the successful portrayal of a character type, continues to be central to her work today.
This set of posters was produced to commemorate an action performed by VALIE EXPORT in Munich in 1968. She entered a cinema wearing trousers with a triangle of fabric removed at the crotch and walked between the rows of seated viewers. Her action was intended to confront the clich of womens cinematic representation as passive objects. The posters were then fly-posted in the streets. I wanted to be provocative, to provoke, but also aggression was part of my intention...I sought to change the peoples way of seeing and thinking, the artist has said.
Gallery label, February 2004
Magrittes disconcertingly deadpan style is seen clearly in these four simply painted scenes, which seem to be indistinguishable apart from the disappearance of the man of the title. They were based on an illustration in a popular health manual. There are slight changes of perspective between the four panels, which add to the disquieting effect, and may relate to the displacement of images in early 3-D viewing devices. This subtle undermining of the everyday was characteristic of Magritte and his Belgian Surrealist colleagues, who preferred quiet subversion to overt public action.
Henry Moore's subject is the aged body. He made these drawings of his own hands when he was eighty-one and suffering from ill-health. 'Hands can convey so much' he said, 'they can beg or refuse, take or give, be open or clenched, show content or anxiety. They can be young or old, beautiful or deformed'.
This waif-like girl is among Picassos cast of people from the margins of society. A melancholic mood is conveyed with veils of paint. The chemise accentuates, rather than disguises, the slenderness of the girls body that the painter shows as sexually desirable. She is fragile, perhaps sickly. Her delicate pink flesh evokes the skin-colour that Picassos friend Guillaume Apollinaire identified among street performers: that purplish pink one finds on the cheeks of certain fresh young girls close to death.
This scene, a companion to Peace, hung alongside, shows Napoleon in exile on the island of St Helena. It was painted in the year his ashes were returned to France. The image neither demonises nor heroicises the figure, but suggests the futility of conflict. The isolated uniformed body appears incongruous in its surroundings, while the red palette recalls the trauma of battle. In verses attached to the canvas, Turner refers to the sunset as a sea of blood.
According to the inscription (bottom left), this painting shows Two Ladies of the Cholmondeley Family, Who were born the same day, Married the same day, And brought to Bed [gave birth] the same day. To mark this dynastic event, they are formally presented in bed, their babies wrapped in scarlet fabric. Identical at a superficial glance, the lace, jewellery and eye colours of the ladies and infants are in fact carefully differentiated. The format echoes tomb sculpture of the period. The women, whose precise identities are unclear, were probably painted by an artist based in Chester, near the Cholmondeley estates.
One of the defining features of the 1980s, when this sculpture was made, was the growth of consumerism. Koons, a former stockbroker, made a series of works presenting consumer items in glass cases. Removed from any  practical purpose, they become fetish objects to be gazed at and admired. This work was originally made for an exhibition on the themes  of achievement, survival and death. Posters in the exhibition presented basketball as a means of achieving fame and fortune for young working-class Americans. According to Koons, the suspended basketballs suggest death, the ultimate state of being.
Picassos relief constructions, which he began making in 191213, extended traditional still life painting into three-dimensional space. This composition is closely related to his paintings of the period: it appears to depict a table top or small sideboard, with a knife, a beer glass, two slices of sausage and a slice of cheese or pt. This work, however, emphasises that the painting is an object in itself. The incorporation of found objects  in this case, the real upholstery fringe to represent a table - helped to establish a new freedom in the artists choice of materials.
Hamilton claimed that any interior is 'a set of anachronisms, a museum, with the lingering residues of decorative styles that an inhabited space collects.' In this print, he contrasts an elaborately decorated interior with uncluttered coloured planes reminiscent of modernist architecture and design. The clash of styles is also reflected in his combination of painting with silkscreen printing, a technique associated with commercial art that allowed the direct transfer of photographic images onto canvas.
Gallery label, September 2004
John Varley  an artist, astrologer and close friend of Blake  reported in his Treatise on Zodiacal Physiognomy (1882) that Blake once had a spiritual vision of a ghost of a flea and that This spirit visited his imagination in such a figure as he never anticipated in an insect. While drawing the spirit it told the artist that all fleas were inhabited by the souls of men who were by nature bloodthirsty to excess. In the painting it holds a cup for blood-drinking and stares eagerly towards it. Blakes amalgamation of man and beast suggests a human character marred by animalistic traits.
Part man, part beast, these howling creatures first appeared in Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion, which Bacon painted during the Second World War. One critic described that picture as a reflection of the atrocious world into which we have survived. Bacon identified his distorted figures with the vengeful Greek Furies, while the title places them in the Christian context of the crucifixion. In this version, painted in 1988, Bacon changed the background colour from orange to blood red, and placed more space around the figures, plunging them into a deep void.
Isidore Ducasse was a nineteenth-century author better known by his pseudonym, the Comte de Lautramont. This work was inspired by Ducasses famous phrase: As beautiful as the chance meeting, on a dissecting table, of a sewing machine and an umbrella. The Surrealists saw this simile, describing the surprising conjunction of disparate elements, as a model for Surrealist images in art and poetry. Man Ray used a real sewing machine as the wrapped object. The original example, now lost, was exhibited in the 1936 Surrealist exhibition of objects.
Fuseli first read Shakespeares plays as a student in Zurich. This painting illustrates the scene in A Midsummer Nights Dream in which the fairy queen Titania is punished for her pride by her husband Oberon. He casts a spell which makes her fall in love with Bottom, whose head has been magically replaced by that of an ass. Here Titania orders her fairies to serve his every whim. Shakespeares enchanted realm held a special appeal for Fuseli, allowing him to explore the supernatural world. This painting was commissioned by the publisher John Boydell as part of his Shakespeare Gallery.
The bride is described in the biblical Song of Solomon. Rossetti shows her at the moment she takes the veil from her face, transfixing the viewer with her direct gaze and the power of her beauty. The pictures lush exoticism is accentuated by the flowers and the brides luxurious Japanese dress and Chinese headpiece. Her attendants are of varying physical types and ethnic origin. Some modern commentators suggest that Rossetti is celebrating the diversity of beauty. Others see it as racist, a visualisation of the supremacy of the brides whiteness, in contrast to the darker complexions of her attendants.
The coloured discs strung out diagonally across the picture are so arranged that each one leads on to the next and the movement is directed back again into the picture at the two ends. Perhaps because of this infinitely looping effect, the artists wife Sonia considered Endless Rhythm to be the most appropriate title. The year after painting this, Delaunay was commissioned to paint murals for the Aeronautics pavilion at the 1937 Paris International Exhibition; the resulting compositions included discs, rings and colour rhythms on a huge scale.
Early One Morning is a major example of the kind of sculpture that established Caro as the leading young sculptor of the 1960s. In this work, his arrangement of planes and lines along a horizontal axis gave greater freedom in creating different rhythms and configurations. The work has no fixed visual identity and no single focus of interest. Rather, it unfolds and expands into the spectators space, its appearance changing with the viewpoint. The individual elements are unified by the bright red colour and Caro sees the way they cohere, making a sculptural whole, as being like the relationship of notes within a piece of music.
Looking into this cube, you see an interior lined with mirrors to create the illusion that the circles cut into its walls are receding into infinite space. The appearance of the interior is affected by external conditions, such as the brightness of the room it is in, and any surrounding colours which can be caught by the mirrors. The title may refer to the snow-like appearance of the floating dots, or suggest the transient, ever-shifting nature of the artwork itself.
While making Stack, Cragg randomly accumulated miscellaneous objects and materials, which he ordered into a solid, geometric structure. The layering of different kinds of materials suggests a geological structure, showing the interconnection of raw and fabricated materials in a landscape shaped over time by mankind. Stack demonstrates Craggs interest in humanitys impact on nature through industry, science and technology; and the evolution of organic and man-made landscapes.
This work belongs to a series that Dubuffet called beaten pastes because the main paint layer resembled butter, into which he scratched the graffiti-like figures. He wrote I am at a loss to explain just what it was in these paintings that gave me - that still gives me - such a keen satisfaction. It probably has something to do with the physical pleasure derived from spreading freely, with a large spatula as broad as ones hand, this beautiful white paste... then letting the long knife wander over the smooth paste, tracing with such perfect ease graffiti of sonorous colours.
The blindfolded Angel of Anarchy is loosely based on an earlier painted plaster head. Agar stated that with this new work she wanted to create something totally different, more astonishing, powerful ... more malign. It suggests the foreboding and uncertainty that she felt about the future in the late 1930s. Believing that women are the true surrealists, Agar wrote: the importance of the unconscious in all forms of Literature and Art establishes the dominance of a feminine type of imagination over the classical and more masculine order.
The inspiration for this painting was Thomas  Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur' (1485), in which  Guinevere's adulterous love for Sir Lancelot is  one of the central themes. The model is Jane  Burden who became Morris's wife in 1859, and also  appears in Rossetti's 'Proserpine' displayed  nearby. She was 'discovered' by Morris and  Rossetti when they were working together on the  Oxford Union murals, the subject matter for which  was also taken from Malory. The painting is  essentially a portrait of her in medieval dress.  It is a splendid expresion of the intense medieval  style prevailing in Rossetti's circle in the late  1850s, with its emphasis on pattern and historical  detail. This is Morris's only completed oil  painting.
This is a small portrait of the maverick gay performer and nightclub personality, Leigh Bowery, who died in 1994. The extraordinary costumes he created for himself played on fashion, fetishism and carnival aesthetics, which transformed his sixteen stones of flesh into an androgynous spectacle.Freud met him in 1988 and for four years painted him regularly. He was fascinated by Bowerys bulky physique and his awareness of the body as a sculptural object. In this painting, Freud shows him close-up and naked. The vulnerability of the sleeping figure lends the painting a touching intimacy.
The Old Testament tells how Jacob tricked his father, Isaac, into giving him the birthright belonging to Esau, his elder brother. Later, at a crisis in his life, Jacob wrestles through the night with an unknown assailant, who restrains him by dislocating his thigh. Here, the angel is supporting Jacob, who has just collapsed. Jacob realises he has been fighting God. In the morning the angel blesses him for not giving up. This sculpture has been seen as representing an artist struggling with his materials, as well as the struggles of European Jews during the Second World War.
Turner's first oil shown at the Royal Academy was  a marine nocturne, shown in 1796. This night piece of the Thames, from a position near that of Tate Britain, belongs to the following year. Moonlight effects were a fashionable pictorial convention, mainly derived from Dutch seventeenth-century painters like Aert van der Neer then popular with British collectors. Here, however, the impression  is of an uncontrived naturalism.
The emphasis on the violent gesture in post-war abstract painting culminated in Saint Phalles Shooting Pictures. She filled polythene bags with paint and enclosed them within layers of plaster against a blockboard backing. Spectators were invited to shoot at these constructions, releasing the paint. This one was shot by artists Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns. Saint Phalle stopped making these works in 1963, explaining I had become addicted to shooting, like one becomes addicted to a drug.
This picture was exhibited at the National Gallery in 1941. It was described in the catalogue as 'a terrifying vista of recumbent shapes, pale as all underground life tends 

to be pale; regimented, as only fear can regiment; helpless yet tense, safe yet listening, uncouth, uprooted, waiting 

in the tunnel for the dawn to release them. This is not the descriptive journalism of art. 

It is imaginative poetry of a high order.'
The quilt includes two patches inscribed in the artists handwriting. One reads: 800 men and boys/ their bodies floating/ like flotsam and/jetsam on the surf/ ice cold black/ waters, an eary [sic] grave,/ of which you invented. The other accuses a woman of Crimes against Humanity: you, supposed mother  A mother who Reiked [sic] of Power CRAZY Hate and Fear, of all the terrible things that you did, in the name of political conquest. Its ending clearly refers to the Falklands War: In 1982, A year so many conscripts did not got home  Because you, you killed them all.
This painting marks the culmination of Nashs personal response to Surrealism, of which he had been aware since the late 1920s. As the title suggests, it echoes the Surrealists fascination with Freuds theories of the power of dreams to reveal the unconscious. Nash explained that various elements were symbolic: the self-regarding hawk belongs to the material world, while the spheres reflected in the mirror refer to the soul. Typically, Nash set this scene on the coast of Dorset, unearthing the uncanny within the English landscape.
The text painted over the scene in this work is a line from the end of the ninth chapter of J G Ballards 1975 dystopian novel High Rise. Ballards vision of a dark futuristic urban environment contrasts with the idyllic rural sunset depicted in the painting. For Ruscha, the phrase was a powerful thought coupled with a pictorial idea that ends in a gentle kind of clash.
Delicate linear forms float on the open blue that Mir associated with dreams. With Andr Masson, Mir was the first to create imagery using automatic techniques in which forms seemed to emerge directly from the unconscious. From this he developed his own personal sign language, which simplified familiar things such as stars, birds and parts of the body. He later revealed, for example, that the white shape in this painting signified a horse.
Gallery label, September 2004
In his mature work, Rothko abandoned specific reference to nature in order to paint images with universal associations. By the late 1940s he had developed a style in which hazy, luminous rectangles float within a vertical format. Rothko wrote that the great artistic achievements of the past were pictures of the human figure alone in a moment of utter immobility. He sought to create his own version of this solitary meditative experience, scaling his pictures so that the viewer is enveloped in their subtly shifting, atmospheric surface.
This dramatic work was probably inspired by a performance of Shakespeares tragedy Macbeth. Encouraged by the deceptive prophecy of witches, Macbeth and his wife plot to take the crown of Scotland by murdering King Duncan in his sleep. Here Macbeth emerges horrified from the murder scene off-stage, still holding the bloodied weapons. Lady Macbeth takes control of the situation but by the end of the play, consumed by guilt, she succumbs to madness and suicide. Fuseli treats the scene with an almost supernatural intensity.
Gallery label, August 2004
On the table is a model, made entirely of couscous, of the ancient Algerian city of Ghardaa. One of the photographs on the wall depicts the Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier, who visited Ghardaa in 1931 and adapted elements of its buildings into his own designs. Another photograph shows Fernand Pouillon, one of Le Corbusiers followers, who drew upon these ideas to design the social housing project in suburban Paris where Attia grew up, as the child of Algerian parents. The artists own history, and the wider post-colonial relationship between Algeria and France, are therefore expressed through this work.
This work was painted at the height of the First World War, which seems to be its subject. Men and women in rigid poses, their mouths crying in silent unison, seem trapped on a carousel that revolves endlessly. Gertler was a conscientious objector. He lived near Londons Hampstead Heath, and may have been inspired by an annual fair held there for wounded soldiers. The fairground ride, traditionally associated with pleasure and entertainment, is horrifically transformed into a metaphor for the relentless military machine. He explained, Lately the whole horror of war has come freshly upon me.
Wright emphasises the drama of the erupting Vesuvius through contrasts: between the tranquillity of the sea and the violence of the volcano, the cool light reflected from the moon and clouds with the hellish spewing of fire and lava. In comparison to the volatile power of the volcano, the tiny foreground figures stress man's insignificance before the sublime
This painting addresses the plight of a single woman trying to make a living in a hostile environment. A young woman in mourning dress offers a picture to a dealer whose expression suggests rejection. Osborn was actively involved in the campaign for womens rights that gathered momentum in the mid-19th century. Her painting was probably intended as a political statement as its exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1857 coincided with the formation of the Society of Female Artists, an organisation aimed at enabling women to exhibit and sell their work in public.
Sargent first met Monet in 1876, but the  two artists were closest ten years later. It was probably in 1885 that they painted together at Giverny, near Paris. Sargent admired the way  that Monet worked out of doors, and imitated some of his subjects and methods in sketches such as this. It is characteristic of Sargent to  give a human view of Monet's practice and  of the patience of his wife, who sits behind  him. When he settled in London in 1885 Sargent  was initially viewed as avant-garde, but came  to be the greatest society portraitist of his day.
Gallery label, August 2004
Mona Hatoum left Beirut in 1975 for a short visit to London. When war broke out in the Lebanon she found it impossible 

to return. In this video, letters from her mother in Beirut, written in Arabic, move across the screen. They are read aloud, 

in English, by the artist. Hatoum's mother is also heard, speaking openly about her feelings and sexuality, accompanied by images of her in the shower.
The imagery for this print series is based on magazines dating from the 1930s to the 1970s aimed at African-American audiences, many of which feature advertisements for improvements including wigs, hair pomades and skin bleaching creams. Gallagher transformed these images using a variety of printing techniques, combining traditional processes of etching and lithography with recent developments in digital technology. She also made modifications by cutting and layering images and text and adding a range of materials including plasticine, glitter, gold leaf, toy eyeballs and coconut oil. Her witty and sophisticated interventions emphasise the complex construction of identity.
Gallery label, August 2004
Nan Goldin describes her photographs as a 'visual diary'. She has stated: 'These are my friends, these are my family, this is myself. There is no separation between me and what I photograph.' The self-portrait Nan one month after being battered was taken to prevent Goldin from forgetting the damage caused by her boyfriend's violence. She applies the same frankness to the lives of her close friends. Goldin is attracted to the glamour of the world of drag-queens and transvestites. In Jimmy Paulette and Taboo! Undressing, NYC 1991, two men are caught in the midst of their gender transformation. Characteristically, this moment of exposure is presented with candour and empathy.
Gallery label, September 2004
France invaded Jersey on 5 January 1781. The governor surrendered the island after the fall of its capital, St Helier. A twenty-four-year-old garrison commander, Major Peirson, rejected the surrender and led a successful counter-attack. Peirson was in fact killed shortly before the battle, but Copley shows him dying at the moment of British victory, beneath the Union flag.The officers in the painting were said to be portraits, as was the image of Peirsons black servant, who is avenging his masters death. Peirson became a national hero and the painting drew crowds when it was first exhibited.
This painting has a dream-like atmosphere: the woman is pensive and the reflection of her face in the mirror is silhouetted against a picture. There is no story; viewers were intended to appreciate the pictures design, colour and mood. Whistlers enthusiasm for Japan influenced the composition and the selection of objects. It inspired the poet Algernon Swinburne to write Before the Mirror and his verses, written on sheets of gold paper, were pasted onto the original frame. Whistlers lover, Joanna Hiffernan, was the model and it was painted at Whistlers house in Chelsea.
Icaruss father, the inventor Daedalus, made wings that allowed them to fly away from their island prison. The exhilarated Icarus forgot warnings and soared too close to the sun, melting the wax that secured the feathers, and he fell to his death. Charles Darwins publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859 gave an optimistic picture of the present and future evolution of humankind, but it also introduced ideas of a deep and obscure past. Art and literature took up this theme of origins, mans mythical history and struggles between animal and human nature.
Duchamp regarded chance as a means 'to combat logical reality'. This work was made by dropping three threads, each a metre long, from a height equal to their length, then cutting wooden rulers to record the shape in which each had fallen. Duchamp described these as 
'a preserved metre, preserved chance'. He later used the templates in his composition on glass The Bride Stripped Bare by her Bachelors, Even (The Large Glass) to draw the capillary tubes connected to the nine Bachelors' heads.
This work is made from a commercial plaster reproduction of the death mask of the French Emperor Napoleon. Magritte painted at least five of these casts, each with sky and clouds. Discussing the works, the artists friend the Surrealist poet Paul Noug suggested an association between death, dreams and the depth of the sky. He commented: a patch of sky traversed by clouds and dreams [can] transfigure the very face of death in a totally unexpected way.
The treatment of the human figure in the Cubist paintings of Picasso and Braque is often reminiscent of sculpture. In this work, made in mid-1909, Picasso used planes of warm greys and burnt sienna to establish the bulk of the body. The shifting directions of the brushstrokes indicate the depth of the surfaces and enhance individual features such as the conical socket of the eye. Such techniques were inspired by African sculptures. The poet Andr Salmon described Picassos studio as filled with the strange wooden grimaces... [of] a superb selection of African and Polynesian sculpture.
Gallery label, September 2004
After his experiences in the First World War, Lger became convinced that art should be accessible to all. He moved away from pure abstraction towards the stylised depiction of real objects, putting great emphasis on order, clarity and harmony. In the 1920s he developed a concern with geometric composition and decoration. This painting shows a relatively naturalistic still life of a workmans lunch on a table. The primary colours of the mug and tablecloth contrast with the dazzling black and white patterns in the background.
The central rotund shape in this painting derives from a photograph of a Sudanese corn-bin, which Ernst has transformed into a sinister mechanical monster. Ernst often re-used found images, and either added or removed elements in order to create new realities, all the more disturbing for being drawn from the known world. The works title comes from a childish German rhyme that begins: The elephant from Celebes has sticky, yellow bottom grease. The paintings inexplicable combinations, such as the headless female figure and the elephant-like creature, suggest images from a dream and the Freudian technique of free association.
One of a group of cursory marine sketches datable to the late 1820s, and perhaps painted while at East Cowes, or in the studio, from recollections of Turner's stay there. Although unlikely to have been painted outdoors, from nature, this canvas is included to show how Turner used his rolls of canvas, and how the Cowes sketches would have looked before they were separated. The canvas bears three sketches of sea and sky, one of which was painted upside down so that one sky serves for two subjects if the canvas is turned. It is exhibited with two seascapes the right way up.
Nan Goldin describes her photographs as a 'visual diary'. She has stated: 'These are my friends, these are my family, this is myself. There is no separation between me and what I photograph.' The self-portrait Nan one month after being battered was taken to prevent Goldin from forgetting the damage caused by her boyfriend's violence. She applies the same frankness to the lives of her close friends. Goldin is attracted to the glamour of the world of drag-queens and transvestites. In Jimmy Paulette and Taboo! Undressing, NYC 1991, two men are caught in the midst of their gender transformation. Characteristically, this moment of exposure is presented with candour and empathy.
The Derby Day presents an intricate panorama of the annual horse race at Epsom Downs in Surrey, an event that attracted a broad cross-section of Victorian society. When the picture was first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1858, it proved so popular that a rail had to be put up to keep back the crowds. There are three main incidents. On the far left a group of men in top hats focus on the thimble-rigger with his table. In the centre is an acrobat and his son, who looks longingly at a sumptuous picnic being laid out by a footman. Behind them are carriages filled with racegoers, including, on the far right, the mistress of a man leaning against the carriage.
In his mature work, Rothko abandoned specific reference to nature in order to paint images  with universal associations. By the late 1940s,  he had developed a style in which hazy, pulsating rectangles float within a vertical format. He explained that these shapes 'have no direct association with any particular visible experience, but in them one recognises the principle and passion of organisms'.
Picassos Dove
became a symbol for the Peace movement, and for the ideals of the Communist Party, after it was used to illustrate the poster of the World Peace Congress in Paris in April 1949. In the same month, Picasso named his fourth child Paloma, the Spanish word for dove. At the 1950 World Peace Congress in Sheffield Picasso made a brief speech recounting how his father had taught him to paint doves, which he concluded, I stand for life against death; I stand for peace against war.
Gallery label, September 2004
The citizen was based on stills from a 1980 news report about the IRA dirty protest. After the government revoked their Special Category status and began to treat them as ordinary criminals, inmates in Long Kesh decided to wear only prison blankets and to daub their cell walls with excrement. Hamilton wrote that he could not condone the methods of the IRA, but was struck by the resemblance to Christian martyrdom. He also felt a connection to the prisoners since they had produced wall paintings. One panel shows the prisoner and his cell; the other is more abstract, an unconfined space.
Matisse and Derain painted portraits of each other  while staying at the port of Collioure in the  south of France. Using vivid, apparently  arbitrary, colours, Matisse has captured the  sensation of sunlight striking the sitter's face  and casting a heavy shadow down one side. He has  also tried to create a dynamic but balanced  relationship between complementary colours, such  as blue and orange, red and green. Complementary  colours 'complete' each other: they are at their  most intense when placed together. Matisse  adjusted his colours to obtain the maximum  intensity. This non-naturalistic use of colour can  be seen as a radical development of certain  aspects of Impressionist art, and it led the  critics to dub Matisse a 'fauve' (wild beast).
Rauschenberg began making silkscreen paintings in 1962. He would screen-print images from books and magazines, along with his own photographs, onto the canvas, then apply painterly brushstrokes reminiscent of Abstract Expressionism. His intention was 'to escape the familiarity of objects and collage'. Like all these works, Almanac has no specific meaning or narrative. The images are organised in a loose, poetic manner, creating an impression of visual flux that allows the viewer to free-associate .
Gallery label, May 2003
Gormley became known for his casts of his own body. In this early work a mirror-image of his recumbent body is delineated in hollows eaten out of layers made of 8640 slices of Mothers Pride bread. The final form is suggestive of the carved pose on medieval tombs. From a Roman Catholic background, the artist perhaps references the ritual of consuming the body of Christ through the taking of Communion bread.
Nathaniel Bacon did not paint professionally, although he was a skilled amateur artist. The subject matter of this picture, a cookmaid surrounded with lavish produce, is more usually associated with Dutch and Flemish art. It is highly unusual in England for the period and associated only with Bacon, who may have been influenced by pictures of this type during his travels in the Low Countries. Every item depicted is known to have been growing in England. Bacon himself was a keen gardener and grew melons successfully on his Suffolk estate.
Freud is famous for his supposedly objective images of people, particularly naked women. Here the figure is shown lying awkwardly on a bed, with nothing else visible except the stool. It is as if she is an animal on the dissecting table. This feeling is reinforced by the harsh, artificial lighting.The title suggests that this is a painting of a particular person, setting it apart from anonymous or generalised conventional nudes. But Freuds inclusion of his tools in the foreground reminds us that we are, in fact, looking at the artificial setting of an artists studio.
Hogarth is known for his satirical views of contemporary subjects. He visited France in 1748 and while sketching the fortifications at Calais was suspected of spying and arrested, as shown far left. Hogarth represents the French by a rabble of scrawny soldiers and a fat friar, salivating over the haunch of beef imported for the British tourists. Hogarth contrasts France implicitly with an England where all eat roast beef and not soupe maigre (watery soup). The Old England of the title alludes to an idea of an England when kings protected their people against unjust masters and all lived in harmony and prosperity; again, in contrast to France.
The famous actress, Dame Ellen Terry (1847-1928), is shown here in the role  of Lady Macbeth. At the first performance in 1888, Sargent was struck by Terry's appearance and persuaded her to sit  for a portrait. He invented her dramatic pose, which did not occur in the production. Oscar Wilde, who saw  Terry's arrival at Sargent's Chelsea  studio, remarked, 'The street that  on a wet and dreary morning has vouchsafed the vision of Lady Macbeth  in full regalia magnificently seated in  a four-wheeler can never again be as other streets: it must always be full  of wonderful possibilities.'
This representation of the volcanic destruction of the ancient Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum in AD 79 was the centrepiece of John Martins one-man exhibition held at the Egyptian Hall in 1822. He stressed the topographical and historical accuracy of his scene, providing visitors to the exhibition with maps and plans for reference.
Gonzalez-Torres often used simple forms loaded with highly charged emotional and political meaning. The rings could be wedding bands, conjoined to create the symbol for infinity  and eternal love. The use of two identical circular objects occurs throughout Gonzalez-Torress work as a sign of perfect lovers. Their exact symmetry also alludes to gay love.
The female nude has been Freuds main theme for years. Critics have linked his work to the tradition of realism, but he pointed out there is a distinction between fact and truth. Truth has an element of revelation about it.Like William Coldstreams paintings also shown in this room, Freud reminds us that this woman is standing in his studio. The rags piled behind her are those he uses to clean his brushes. They introduce an idea of dirtiness, perhaps even bodily secretions. He may be suggesting there is more to a truthfully represented body than its appearance.
This is Spencer's first self-portrait in oils. In its  dark and rich colour harmonies and its strongly modelled form, the painting attempts to emulate the style of an Old Master painting. Spencer recalled that he was inspired to paint it in this manner after seeing a reproduction of a head  of Christ by an Italian Renaissance artist called Luini. The portrait was painted in the front  bedroom of Spencer's family home, Fernlea,  at Cookham, Berkshire.
Schwitters started this assemblage of discarded rubbish and printed ephemera in Germany in 1920. Seventeen years later he brought it with him to Norway, having escaped from Nazi Germany. There he added Norwegian material: theatre tickets, receipts, newspaper cuttings, scraps of lace, and a box with two china dogs. The different layers of collage reflect the artists journey into exile.
In the 1930s Barbara Hepworth and her husband Ben Nicholson were members of the London-based avant-garde. Shortly before the outbreak of war they moved to Cornwall with their children. Hepworths abstract forms, which seem akin to caves and shells, were affected by the Cornish landscape. Her response to nature was not romantic or mystical but more firmly based on actual observation. Circles and spheres had dominated her work. These were replaced by ovals which gave her sculptures two centres rather than one, complicating their interior form.
This is one of three paintings painted by Martin inspired by the Book of Revelation, the other two being The Last Judgement and The Great Day of His Wrath. All three depict scenes following the end of the world, in this case a vision of a new heaven and earth coming down from God out of Heaven prepared as a bride is adorned for her husband. Following their first exhibition in London in 1853, the paintings were continually on tour, appearing in theatres, music halls, commercial and civic spaces across Britain and beyond.
Pair to 'Shade and Darkness - The Evening of the Deluge'. This triumphant explosion of light brilliantly exploits the warm side of the spectrum. It celebrates God's Covenant with Man after the Flood. The serpent in the centre represents the brazen serpent raised by Moses in the wilderness as a cure for plague. Here it symbolises Christ's redemption of Man in the New Covenant. Turner's verses rather undermine the optimism of the religious message by emphasising the transience of the natural phenomena engendered by the 'returning sun'.
Dumas has made several paintings in which a figure lies face up with eyes closed and mouth open in an ambiguous, seemingly erotic pose. Here the subject is Red Army Faction terrorist Ulrike Meinhof. Found dead in her prison cell in May 1976, she appeared to have committed suicide, although she may have been murdered. The title acknowledges the source of the image: a photograph printed in the German magazine Stern. Dumas was interested in re-interpreting an image that had previously been used by artist Gerhard Richter, who made paintings based on the same photograph in 1988.
Dijkstra worked on a number of portraits of young bathers, known as the Beaches series, between 1992 and 1996, and then again in 1998. Each time, she chose a similar location and set her camera  at a relatively low viewpoint before inviting her subjects to pose. Dijkstra demands the same degree of concentration from her sitters as she has herself in preparing the shot. As a result,  her images are filled with psychological intensity. Each bather seems to scrutinise the camera, as they, in turn, are scrutinised by it.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
This picture illustrates the central event of the book of Revelation. On a throne in the heavens sits Christ in judgement, surrounded by the four and twenty elders. Below on the right the forces of evil, commanded by Satan, are defeated and tumble into a bottomless pit. To the left on Mount Zion are the good, already in the plains of heaven and awaiting the call to appear before the throne. Martin included a high percentage of artists and poets among the good; these were identified (as were many of the evil characters) in a chart which he published to accompany the picture.
This work relates to the tradition of full-length portraits of women that is associated in particular with the work of earlier artists, such as Van Dyck and Gainsborough. However, it is executed with a clarity and precision that give it an unmistakeably modern feeling. Frampton said that he made this painting as a relaxation from commissions, and to celebrate an assembly of objects... beautiful in their own right. The sitter was Margaret Austin-Jones, then aged twenty-three. Her dress was made up from a Vogue pattern by Framptons mother. The vase, made in mahogany, was designed by Frampton himself.
Rileys paintings of the 1960s were the best-known works of what became called op art. This referred to the optical effects that dominate the viewers experience of the painting. Sometimes such works have an almost physical effect, destabilising the viewer. In this case, however, the gradual changes in the shape of the grey forms seem to suggest two abutting cylinders receding into the picture frame. The fame of such works not only epitomised the way in which art reached a wider audience in the 1960s,but also influenced fashion and a wider visual culture.
Hamilton based this work on a photograph, appropriated from a newspaper, showing Mick Jagger handcuffed to the art dealer Robert Fraser. The photograph appeared following their appearance in court on drugs charges. Both were convicted.The title plays the term Swinging London against the judges insistence on imposing a swingeing penalty. For many, this occasion typified the moral backlash against the liberalisation of the 1960s.
Gallery label, September 2004
Warhol began making silkscreens of an empty electric chair in 1963, a time when the ethics of capital punishment were being fervently debated in America. Designed to make killing as efficient and impersonal as possible, the electric chair unites Warhols fascination with death and with mechanised production. He presents these bleak images in a deadpan manner, without social commentary or moral consolation. The emotional distance is heightened by his audacious use of colour, which is at odds with his morbid subject matter.
Mirs painting-poems combine painted and written elements. This work was built around the first line of an erotic poem, balancing words and signs. The two touching triangles represent a woman in Mirs language of signs, and the bulbous outline with hairs relates to his usual sign for the female sex. The star appears only as a word, although the ladder alludes to the desire to reach for the stars. This exemplifies Mirs ability to combine simple imagery with ancient symbolism and make contact with deeply held instincts.
By 1951, Pollock had achieved considerable success with his dripped and poured abstract painting, and was widely regarded as the leading young American artist. Perhaps fearing that he was reaching a dead-end in his work, he embarked on a series of black and white paintings in which figures emerge, as they had in his early works. After rolling the canvas out on the floor, he would apply the paint - usually industrial enamel paint  with sticks and basting syringes, which he wielded like a giant fountain pen, according to his wife, Lee Krasner.
Banner made a series of works based on the verbal description of a film scene. Here, she describes the frantic chase scene in Point Break 1991, directed by Kathryn Bigelow. Banner explained that Action adventure movies ... [are] always stretching the possibilities of the screen containing what the eye cant hold, always too fast to see everything. Written out, the crescendo is slowed down, as viewers are forced to read the narrative in a steady manner. Banner acknowledged this, observing that when its translated into words  [the scene] becomes this kind of shaggy-dog story ... the opposite of keen imperative momentum.
In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, when this work was made, materials were hard to come by. It was the height of civil war, hunger and disorder in Russia. To find any part of machinery was next to impossible, said Gabo. Originally made to demonstrate the principles of kinetics to his students, it reflects the artists belief in a sculpture in which space and time were active components. A strip of metal is made to oscillate so that a standing wave is set up. This movement in real time creates the illusion of volumetric space.
Pollock began to drip and pour paint in 1947.  This work, in which streams of black and white enamels were poured onto the surface, shows  the improvisatory possibilities of this method.  The sweeping arc of Pollock's gesture can be  seen in the liquid black, which has bled into the white painted background to become grey. This acts as a base over which the thicker white paint is deliberately woven. The effect is rhythmic but controlled, energetic but delicate. Although there was an element of chance, Pollock frequently emphasised the importance of decisions over  the merely accidental.
This view of the Thames from London Bridge is one of four works painted by Derain, showing the same part of the river. At this time he was a leading member of the fauve group of painters in Paris. He had been sent to London by his dealer to update the popular Thames views painted by Claude Monet a few years earlier. Strongly-coloured and freely-handled, this painting is characteristic of fauvism in creating vivid effects through bold contrasts of colour.
Fougeron was the leading artist associated with the French Communist Party in the early 1950s. Here he caricatures the increasing Americanisation of Europe, then a major target of Communist Party propaganda. Fougerons style plays on the comic-strips associated with American culture. A businessman greeting an American car embodies capitalism. The composition is full of elements that imply criticism of  the French colonial wars in Indo-China and North Africa, the continuing nuclear threat and the exploitation of the underprivileged. The electric chair on a pedestal refers to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, American citizens convicted of spying for the USSR.
Man Ray made the first version of this object shortly after his companion, the American photographer and model Lee Miller, left him. Attaching a photograph of Millers eye to the metronome, he linked his memory of her to the idea of an insistent beat or pulse that was both irksome and unending  a metaphor, perhaps, for human desire. He smashed the original, which he had titled Object to be Destroyed. This later version, produced in an edition of 100, was called Indestructible Object because, he suggested, it would be very difficult to destroy all hundred
Dijkstra decided to make these portraits after witnessing the birth of a friends baby. She photographed three women, one hour (Julie), one day (Tecla) and one week (Saskia) after giving birth. The raw immediacy of these images captures something of the contradictions inherent in this common and yet most singular of human experiences. The women appear at once vulnerable and invincible, traumatised and self-composed.
Appel prepared the surface of Questioning Children by nailing discarded pieces of wood to an old window shutter. The vibrant colours and roughly-painted figures recall the spontaneity of childrens art. CoBrA
artists believed that such unconventional sources could re-invigorate post-war culture. In the same year Appel also used the title Questioning Children for a controversial mural at the Town Hall in Amsterdam, which was condemned as incomprehensible, and covered over with wallpaper. There is a note of tragedy in these works as the Dutch title also means 'begging children' and evokes scenes of poverty that Appel had witnessed in post-war Germany.
The final scene in this series of three paintings is set under the Adelphi arches, by the River Thames. The Art Journal described them as the lowest of all the profound deeps of human abandonment in this metropolis. The woman shelters a young child, the result of her affair. The posters behind her advertise two plays  Victims and A Cure for Love  and Pleasure Excursions to Paris. These are ironic comments on her situation. Despite the moral overtones of the sequence it is left to the viewer to decide whether the woman is to be pitied or condemned.
Gallery label, August 2004
By cropping the figures in his paintings and arranging compositions with the main incidents occurring at the edges of the canvas, Bonnard increases a sense of intimacy while also creating an atmosphere of surreptitious looking. This view of an upside-down bather seen from above is one of his most unusual and innovative compositions. The nude is identifiable as Marthe (Maria Boursin), the painters companion, and the second figure entering from the left as Bonnard himself. Marthes habit of treating her chronic throat infection with frequent baths was a recurring subject in Bonnards work.
Braques interest in collecting musical instruments is reflected in this painting of a small lute called a mandora. Its fragmented style suggests a sense of rhythm and acoustic reverberation that matches the musical subject. Braque explained that he liked to include instruments in his cubist works, in the first place because I was surrounded by them, and secondly because their plasticity, their volumes, related to my particular concept of still life.
Ski Jacket was painted from a newspaper photograph of learner skiers on a Japanese mountain. The painted scene is mirrored imperfectly on both panels, producing a disorientating and dreamlike landscape. The sense of unreality is increased by Doigs choice of colours: frosted pinks and golds. Doig often paints snow scenes because snow somehow has the effect of drawing you inwards and is frequently used to suggest retrospection and nostalgia and make-believe. But the sugary colour has an intensity which is disquieting.
Gallery label, April 2005
Gallery label, July 2008
The individual titles of this series of paintings list the separate pigments used to make them. The paint layers can be seen at the edges. The artist says that these edges can be read ''almost like a bar code'', making it possible to ''uncover the history of each painting''. They come from a group of fifty such works, which trace the history of painting by classifying and indexing the development of artist''s pigments, from early cave paintings to the present day. The information is taken from a chart produced by the paint manufacturers Winsor & Newton.
Gallery label, September 2004
Pollocks Birth is shot through with primeval energy. The process of birth is seen as a desperate struggle. The mask-like faces, drawn from Inuit and Native American art, lend the image an unrestrained energy. Like many modernist artists, Pollock was fascinated by primitive art for its expression of fundamental human fears and desires, particularly as traditional ideas of civilization were tainted by Europes slide into fascism and war.
Her body is bandaged crosswise from the chest down to the feet, like a mummy. Movement becomes impossible. Both her arms are stuck in thickly padded red stumps that serve as supports for the body. In the course of the action, the performer learns that the arms, despite [her] upright posture, begin to touch the ground, fuse with it and become insulating pillars on [her] own body. (Rebecca Horn, Rebecca Horn: Zeichnungen, Objekte, Video, Filme, 17. Mrz  24. April 1977, exh. cat., Cologne: Klnischer Kunstverein, 1977, p.24)
Sarah Lucas makes sculptures from an unexpected range of everyday materials, such as worn furniture, clothing, cigarettes, fruit and vegetables. This sculpture was originally exhibited as part of a larger work, consisting of eight similar bunny girl figures limply arranged around a snooker table. To be snookered, in the language of the game, means to be prevented from scoring. This figure is made from nylon tights stuffed with cotton wadding, and is clipped to an unremarkable office chair. The limp, floppy form undermines the fantasy of the glamorous bunny girl.
Nan Goldin describes her photographs as a 'visual diary'. She has stated: 'These are my friends, these are my family, this is myself. There is no separation between me and what I photograph.' The self-portrait Nan one month after being battered was taken to prevent Goldin from forgetting the damage caused by her boyfriend's violence. She applies the same frankness to the lives of her close friends. Goldin is attracted to the glamour of the world of drag-queens and transvestites. In Jimmy Paulette and Taboo! Undressing, NYC 1991, two men are caught in the midst of their gender transformation. Characteristically, this moment of exposure is presented with candour and empathy.
This is one of a number of works showing men in showers painted around the time of Hockney's first visit to Los Angeles in 1963. After this visit athletic male bodies, often combined with water, became 

a recurrent theme in his work. These paintings often derive from images in magazines. Hockney has said: 'For an artist the interest in showers is obvious: the whole body is always in view and 

in movement, usually gracefully, as the bather is caressing his own body. There 

is also a three hundred year old tradition of the bather as a subject in painting.'
These panels form one section of a larger six-part work that documents the relationship between Kelly and her son over a period of six years. Drawing on contemporary feminist thought, and in particular on psychoanalysis, it explores the contradictions for a woman artist between her creative and procreative roles. The work, says Kelly, traces the differences between 'my lived experience as a mother and my analysis of that experience'. To make these panels Kelly recorded and then reflected on a number of conversations with her son, before finally allowing him to scribble across her carefully documented texts.
When this picture was shown at the Academy in 1870 it was accompanied by the description 'the order of Knights was instituted to protect widows and orphans, and to succour maidens in distress'. The work was reported as having been painted in six weeks. It is the only life-size female nude the artist ever painted. Millais had some difficulties in resolving the problems associated with such subject matter. Initially he painted the woman looking towards the spectator. The unpleasant effect this created led him to repaint her head looking away. An 1893 magazine article noted that 'for delicacy's sake' he placed the knight behind her.
This sombre lithograph is in the tradition of seventeenth-century Dutch still lifes known as vanitas, which comment on the transitoriness of worldly pleasures. A book traditionally alludes to excessive pride through learning, and a wine jug to temporary pleasure. The skull is a memento mori, or reminder of death. Picasso was superstitious about death and kept a skull in his own studio, which appeared in a number of his works. Made on 20 February 1946, this print is inevitably associated with the widespread suffering caused by the Second World War.
'Image II' is rooted in Barbara Hepworth's  lifelong engagement with carving. In the 1930s she  had pierced abstract forms, introducing light and  transforming their sense of mass. Even the  substantial 'Image II' (weighing more than 400 kg)  appears effortlessly lightened as a result of its  undercutting, its concavities and the penetrating  hole. Hepworth explained: 'I believe that the  dynamic quality of the surfaces of a sculpture can  be increased by devices which give one the  impression that a form has been created by forces  operating within its own mass as well as from  outside... the piercing of mass is a response to  my desire to liberate mass without departing from  it.
Ball was a leading figure in the Italian Futurist  group. He believed that the power and speed of  machines such as cars were the salient  characteristics of the modern age and aimed to  express this idea in his work. This painting was  originally the right-hand part part of a triptych.  The left-hand part of the triptych was called  'Line of Force + Landscape' and the central one  'Lines of Force + Noise'. The theme of the  triptych was the passage of a car along a white  road, with green and blue forms, evoking earth and  sky, in the background. The pinkish areas in this  painting suggest the exhaust fumes left by the  passing car.
Gallery label, March 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
The photographs of anonymous dead people were selected by Boltanski from obituary notices in Swiss newspapers. The lengths of fabric gathered around the shelves are shroud-like and also evoke the curtain of the crematorium. Aside from this suggestion of 'memento mori' the harsh beams that spotlight each face evoke references to interrogation and torture. These aspects together with the sheer scale of death suggested by the title and by the repetitive presentation employed here have led commentators to find references to the holocaust. However by nominating the victims as Swiss, a neutral people, the association is muted and allows for more intimate, personal and wider, historical reflections.
Austrian artist VALIE EXPORT adopted her pseudonym in 1967 to reject the names of both her father and of her former husband and assume a sort of commercial brand identity. Her works  including films, photographs and performances  expanded the transgressive ideas of Viennese Actionism to include a feminist critique of the limits imposed on the individual based on their perceived gender. In the Identity Transfer series she assumes a distinctly unfeminine pose, at odds with her hair style and make-up, playing with the codes through which gender identity is traditionally conveyed.
Deep reds and greens punctuated by vivid yellow evoke the turning point of the year which is also hinted at in the foliage, stems and berries that appear down the left-hand side of the canvas. The passages of text are harder to distinguish, although the words 'your blood' can be read at two points on the canvas.The artist's red handprint appears near the centre, as if marking his physical presence in the work. Twombly's vigorous approach turns the  canvas into an arena for action: paint is pooled and dripped, encrusted, brushed in thin washes, and pushed about by bare hands.
Responding to an advertisement in Time Out magazine, a series of participants took up Wearing's offer to make their confessions on camera. This work was inspired by 'fly-on-the-wall' documentaries and confessional TV chat shows, but it also evokes the religious ritual of confession and its modern secular equivalent, psychoanalysis. Wearing raises questions about the motives behind confession. Disguised, her participants are free to tell the truth about things to which they would never admit in daily life. At the same time, they can invent flamboyant lies without being caught out.
Exhibited with a quotation from Tennysons The Millers Daughter, Hughess painting suggests a rift between a young couple. The woman turns away from her suitor who bends to kiss her hand. The rose petals at her feet symbolise the fragility of young love, while the blue/green colour scheme heightens the emotional charge of the painting. The scrupulous depiction of naturalistic detail was greatly admired by the design entrepreneur William Morris, the first owner of the painting.
Claude Lorrain was Turner's favourite old master painter. This is one of his greatest essays in Claude's style. It is part of a pair of paintings showing the rise and fall of a great empire; here, Carthage's decline is symbolised by the setting sun.
The title means boredom in French. Sickert suggests the dislocated relationship between the figures by their lack of communication and their surroundings. Despite their close physical proximity, the man and woman face in opposite directions, staring off into space. The room furnishings reinforce the theme, in particular the bell jar containing stuffed birds. This is a marriage suffocating with boredom. Sickerts works provide neither moral nor narrative certainty; which he leaves the viewer to supply.
In 1924 the poet Andr Breton published the first Manifesto of Surrealism. The primary aim of this literary and artistic movement was, he explained: 'to resolve the previously contradictory conditions of dream and reality into an absolute reality, a super-reality.' Inspired by the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud's theory of the unconscious, Surrealism used irrational images to portray the working of the human mind. Max Ernst's Piet or Revolution by Night is typical. The painting replaces the traditional scene of Mary clasping  the body of Christ with an image of the artist himself, held by his father. A staunch Catholic, Ernst's father had denounced his son's work, and the painting is often seen as rising out of their troubled relationship, although - like dreams - it resists precise analysis. Other Surrealists included the poets Paul Eluard and Louis Aragon, and the artists Ren Magritte, Salvador Dal and Joan Mir. Purges and defections meant that by 1939 the strength of the group had dissipated. However, it was not formally disbanded until 1968.
The finished portrait, which was exhibited as Madame X, belongs to the Metropolitan Museum in New York, and Tates version is a full-size sketch. The sitter was the American wife of a French banker in Paris. Sargent deliberately planned a sensational portrait with an unconventional pose. Her head is shown in sharp profile emphasising her nose; her right arm is twisted and her shoulders exposed. The adverse criticism of the finished portrait at the Paris Salon of 1884 so damaged Sargents reputation that he decided to move to Britain.
Wright managed to show modern industry in a way which gave it intensely poetic, quasi-religious significance. Here, the figures in a small iron-forge might almost be part of a nativity. But the birth is a material one as the molten iron is turned on a drum, driven by a tilt-hammer.The different ages of the iron-workers family update the old theme of the ages of man. The presence of his wife and children associate his work with domestic happiness and prosperity. In the light of the later impact of the Industrial Revolution on family and community, this is poignant.
From the mid-1940s Newman had been preoccupied with the Jewish myths of Creation. The vertical strips in his paintings may relate to certain traditions that present God and man as a single beam of light. The name Adam, which in the Old Testament was given to the first man, derives from the Hebrew word adamah (earth), but is also close to adom, (red) and dam (blood). The relationship between brown and red in this painting may therefore symbolise man's intimacy with the earth.
Forests appear frequently in Ernsts works and recall his feelings of the enchantment and terror of the woods near his childhood home. Forests are a potent symbol in German tradition, and were also adopted by the Surrealist group as a metaphor for the imagination. In this work, a small dove, which Ernst liked to use as a symbol to represent himself, is trapped among menacing trees. The shapes are created using a technique he called grattage, in which paint is scraped across the canvas to reveal the imprint of objects placed beneath.
While the topographical details of this painting are hazy and indistinct, the sunset is vividly depicted, lighting up the sky in vibrant reds and oranges, reflected across the water. At the right, passages of white paint may depict snowy Alpine mountains, perhaps those around Lake Lucerne, a destination favoured by the artist during the 1840s.
These two paintings make up two scenes in a triptych (three-part picture) called Womans Mission which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1863. The missing section is Guide of Childhood. As a group the pictures represent the same woman in her role as mother, wife and attentive daughter or, as one critic of the time put it: woman in three phases of her duties as ministering angel. The woman in both pictures bears a striking resemblance to the artists depictions of his own wife, Maria.
Gallery label, September 2004
Like other artists of his generation, Judd challenged traditional European ideas about art-making. He coined the term ?specific objects? to refer to structures that were neither painting nor sculpture, but somewhere in between. This work reflects his desire to create self-sufficient objects, eliminating any factor that might interfere with the physical qualities of its materials. As he wrote, ?A shape, a volume, a colour, a surface is something in itself?.
Judd began making stacks in the 1960s. Most consist of ten elements, although there is variation in the materials used. The stacks are all ordered according to strict principles: the gap between each unit, and between the first unit and the floor, should be equal to the height of a single unit. Since the units are all identical, their significance derives from this pre-determined geometric order rather than from any individual features. However, Judds attention to the sensuous qualities of his materials prevents Untitled from being cold or clinical.
A professional artists model in the 1920s and 1930s, Marguerite Kelsey (1908?1995) was renowned for her gracefulness and ability to hold poses for a long time. Her dress and shoes were chosen and purchased by Frampton for this portrait. They are both classical and, being uncorseted, deliberately modern. The simple, short-sleeved pale tunic dress worn with low-heeled shoes and her straight hair were all essential elements of the fashionable boyish garonne style created by the couturiers Coco Chanel and Jean Patou from the mid-1920s.
In 1950, at the age of 62, Albers began what would become his signature series, the Homage to the Square. Over the next 26 years, until his death in 1976, he produced hundreds of variations on the basic compositional scheme of three or four squares set inside each other, with the squares slightly gravitating towards the bottom edge. What may at first appear to be a very narrow conceptual framework reveals itself as one of extraordinary perceptual complexity. In 1965, he wrote of the series: They all are of different palettes, and, therefore, so to speak, of different climates. Choice of the colours used, as well as their order, is aimed at an interaction - influencing and changing each other forth and back. Thus, character and feeling alter from painting to painting without any additional hand writing or, so-called, texture. Though the underlying symmetrical and quasi-concentric order of squares remains  the same in all paintings  in proportion and placement  these same squares group or single themselves, connect  and separate in many different ways.
Gallery label, August 2004
When I am painting I am not much aware of what is taking place, Pollock said in 1947. By dripping and pouring paint, he was able to work in a free and intuitive way, his thoughts and feelings finding direct expression in the rhythmic patterns he created. Pollock began this painting by pouring black paint onto the canvas, over which he added areas of yellow and crimson with a brush. He then lifted the canvas upright while the paint was still wet, allowing it to sag and run.
In the 1830s and 1840s Turner made dozens of watercolours and oils based on close observation of the sea from the shore. Some of these were worked up into exhibited pictures, while others were used as studies for paintings, or left in an unfinished state.

The shadowy grey shape emerging through the mist may be the harbour wall and lighthouse at Margate, which is the subject of a related canvas, Waves Breaking on a Lee Shore (displayed nearby).
Gallery label, September 2004
The location shown in this painting is the Lovers Seat, an idyllic spot at Fairlight Glen near Hastings in Sussex. Hunt laboured here from mid-August to December 1852, enduring rain, wind and bitter cold to master his view. Despite the changes in weather, the painting seems a credible replication of particular illuminated moment. The colours used to convey light are daringly juxtaposed in order to intensify the clarity of every surface, a method that astounded audiences on both sides of the Channel.
The human body, a traditional theme in western art, was a tricky subject for women artists at the turn of the century because of questions of morality and decorum.  By using a narrow colour range and minimal setting, and suppressing biographical details, John draws attention to the naked body.  At the same time, the character of the model, Fenella Lovell, comes across powerfully. So the viewer experiences this painting, disconcertingly, as a portrait of a contemporary woman with no clothes on, who seems to be uncomfortable that we are looking at her.
For this sculpture, Epstein originally set a plaster figure on top of a real industrial rock drill. This machine-like robot, visored, menacing and carrying within itself its progeny was a symbol of the new age. Epsteins attitude changed, however, as news of the very large number of casualties wrought by the mechanised warfare of the First World War was fully realised. Epstein removed the drill, and cut the figure down at the waist before casting it in bronze. Mutilated and shorn of its virility, the once-threatening figure is now vulnerable and impotent, as much a victim as a perpetrator of violence.
This unfinished, life-size sketch in oil paint represents the 17-year-old Emma Hart (17651815) in the character of the sorceress Circe from Greek mythology. This painting was one of the first of Romneys numerous portraits of Hart, which often represent her as characters from myth and literature. Hart sat many times to Romney in the summer of 1782, after she had become the mistress of the aristocratic politician and collector Charles Greville (17491809), moving into his home at Edgware Row, Paddington. She later married Sir William Hamilton, Grevilles uncle, and became the mistress of Admiral Lord Nelson.
In the early years of cubism, Picasso constructed his images using small facets, or geometric planes, and represented objects from different viewpoints. Many critics of the period believed the artist aimed to represent reality in a new, almost scientific manner. However, as this atmospheric painting shows, Picasso could use this technique for expressive ends. Here, the woman has been all but stripped of her humanity and appears strangely mechanistic. At the same time, Picasso demonstrates his awareness of tradition in her pose and in the play of light within the picture.
Adapting the official map of the London Underground, Patterson has replaced the names of stations with philosophers, actors, politicians and other celebrated figures. The title The Great Bear refers to the constellation Ursa Major, a punning reference to Patterson''s own arrangement of ''stars''. Patterson playfully subverts our belief that maps and diagrams provide a reliable source of information. ''I like disrupting something people take as read'', he comments.
This picture shows the release of a Jacobite soldier, imprisoned by the English after the defeat of Bonnie Prince Charlies army at the battle of Culloden in 1746. The Jacobites wife hands an order of release to the gaoler.Millais based the figure of the woman on his wife, Effie. He was very interested in female psychology and the womans detached gaze suggests her quiet determination.
Blake is best known as one Britains first pop artists. His work combined images from high art and contemporary American and British popular culture. This picture includes 27 variations on the theme of On the Balcony, from a famous painting by Edouard Manet to a newspaper photograph of the royal family. He also includes a range of other references including fashionable American cigarettes, a photograph of his late tutor John Minton, and a painting by fellow-student Leon Kossoff.
When this triptych was first exhibited the drawing-room scene was hung between this painting and the final scene. The writer John Ruskin wrote: the husband discovers his wifes infidelity; he dies five years afterwards. The two lateral pictures represent the same moment of night a fortnight after his death. The same little cloud is under the moon. The two children see it from the chamber in which they are praying for their lost parents, and their mother, from behind a boat under the vault of the river shore. Ruskins comments show that audiences were expected to read pictures like novels.
Throughout his life, Picasso reworked the theme of the female nude. In his eighties, he revised the traditional ideal of beauty with particular violence, subjecting the body to a repeated assault in paint. Here, a reclining female figure is presented as a raw, sexualised arrangement of orifices, breasts and cumbersome limbs. Its all there, Picasso said, I try to do a nude as it is. The face is that of his second wife, Jacqueline Roque.
A figure sleeps in a wooden alcove above a dark cloudy sky. The way into this space is barred by a tablet embedded with everyday objects, which are displayed as in a childrens book. These objects are presented as if dreamed by the sleeper. As Magritte knew, some or all of them could also be read as Freudian symbols. This combination of different possible interpretations adds to the paintings suggestion of unease and disorientation. It was painted when Magritte was closest to the French Surrealist group, having moved temporarily to Paris from Brussels.
This small painting demonstrates Picassos ability to capture an image through very direct means: taut lines laid over four colours. The stylisation of the face makes reference to the flattened planes associated with Cubism, but the incised line also reflects the texture and layering that dominated his work of the 1920s. He was much admired by the Surrealists but, even though sharing their interest in the unconscious and the irrational, resisted any official connection.
Grayson Perry's ceramic vases and pots combine a variety of decorative techniques to address issues of identity, class, sexuality and gender. They often present a sharply satirical view of society and, in particular, the art world.  Aspects of Myself is an autobiographical work showing the artist in the guise of his transvestite alter-ego 'Claire'. Perry''s  visually and thematically complex work challenges the traditional division between fine art and the applied arts.
During the 1980s Rego created paintings inspired by her early life in Portugal. While the scene here could represent a memory of folk festivals or 'festas', it also has a more profound symbolic meaning. The dance can be read as a dance of life, representing the stages from a girl's childhood to old age. The rhythmic movement of the figures contrasts with the stillness of the setting, suggesting the balance between perpetual change and the essential  continuity of existence. Rego's painting has an eerie, dream-like quality typical of her work, which often refers to childhood fears and fantasy. The work can be considered a memorial to Rego's husband, the artist Victor Willing, who died during its completion.
The skyscrapers and railways of New York epitomised the dynamism of the modern metropolis. This painting, originally titled New York  an Abstraction, shows the former-futurist Nevinsons enthusiastic response, in which the urgency of the city is matched with a modernist style of painting derived from pre-war abstraction. However, Nevinsons work did not receive the success for which he had hoped, and his initial excitement gave way to the disillusion indicated by his revised title.
Originally made for the entrance of Tate Britain, this neon wall sculpture presents a text in the form of an equation. While the use of an equation suggests a definitive formula, Creeds words remains ambiguous. It has been interpreted as both a positive statement about the inclusiveness of art, and a negative statement about arts irrelevance. I find it a lot easier if it negates itself at the same time as pushing itself forward  so theres an equal positive and negative which adds up to nothing, but at the same time is something too, the artist has said.
This image is taken from Macbeth: pity, like a naked newborn babe / Striding the blast, or heavens cherubim horsed / Upon the sightless couriers of the air. Blake draws on popularly-held associations between a fair complexion and moral purity. These connections are also made by Lavater, who writes that the grey is the tenderest of horses, and, we may here add, that people with light hair, if not effeminate, are yet, it is well known, of tender formation and constitution. Blakes interest in the characters of different horses can also be seen in his Chaucers Canterbury Pilgrims, hanging nearby.
Pair to 'Light and Colour (Goethe's Theory), The Morning after the Deluge - Moses writing the Book of Genesis'. In these companion pictures, Turner opposes cool and warm colours, and their contrasting emotional associations, as described by Goethe in his 'Farbenlehre' (Theory of Colours). Turner has chosen the biblical Deluge as the vehicle for these ideas, returning to the Historical Sublime he had mastered in some of his earliest exhibition pictures. Originally painted and framed as octagons, this pair carries two of Turner's last and most inspired statements of the natural vortex, while the allusion to Goethe adds a gloss of recent science and theory to a lifetime's preoccupation with elemental forces.
The Mogamma is the government building in Tahrir Square in Cairo, which formed a backdrop for the protests against Hosni Mubaraks regime in early 2011. Mehretu has overlaid architectural drawings of the Mogamma with those of other locations associated with public unrest, including Addis Ababas Meskel Squre and New Yorks Zuccotti Park, the site of the occupy protests. Using digital images and projecting them onto the surface of the canvas, Mehretu complicates the drawn plans so that we can no longer see them clearly. The resulting painting could be seen as a memorial to collective sites of communal resistance.
Since the mid-1970s Sherman has been making portraits featuring herself in a myriad of guises and situations. Paradoxically, her intention is to encourage self-reflection in the viewer: 'I'm trying to make other people recognise something of themselves rather than me', she explains. In these photographs, she appears as a model covering herself up after posing for a nude centrefold. Her sometimes wounded, sometimes confrontational gaze suggests exploitation rather than glamour.
This painting depicts the studio at La Californie, the large Art Nouveau villa near Cannes where Picasso and his partner Jacqueline Roque moved in the summer of 1955. In October and November of that year Picasso depicted his studio twelve times. The room is empty but Picassos presence is strongly felt in his tools and the sculpted head on a modelling stand. The studio had been a favourite subject for his friend and rival Henri Matisse, and it has been suggested that this series was a direct response to the artists death the previous year.
Whistlers viewpoint is from Battersea Bridge, looking up river.  The industrial chimneys of Battersea on the left are balanced by the lights of Cremorne pleasure gardens on the other side of the Thames.  Whistler frames his composition so the river spreads out as a panoramic expanse of water, leading to the vanishing point of the horizon.  The paint was applied quickly, wet on wet, to produce the smooth sheen of its surface.  Whistler has decorated the frame himself, using a motif of gold fish scales.
An early example of Mondrian's pure geometric abstraction, this painting dates from his involvement with the De Stijl group. The strict use of horizontal and vertical lines and primary colours with black and grey is characteristic of De Stijl. Mondrian's aim to evoke a spiritual equilibrium was influenced by the mysticism of Theosophy, which sought universal order. He had been working with chequerboard grids before he began this painting, which introduced greater variety. He told van Doesburg: 'now I do not always keep to the proportional division'.
Ernst studied philosophy and psychology in Bonn and was interested in the alternative realities experienced by the insane. This painting may have been inspired by the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freuds study of the delusions of a paranoiac, Daniel Paul Schreber. Freud identified Schrebers fantasy of becoming a woman as a castration complex. The central image of two pairs of legs refers to Schrebers hermaphroditic desires. Ernsts inscription on the back of the painting reads: The picture is curious because of its symmetry. The two sexes balance one another.
Mondrians pursuit of a new spirituality and a new art for the modern world was fundamental to the modernist art movement. Here he reduces his colour to a single red rectangle, giving the black lines greater importance as compositional elements. The structure is slightly off-set, reflecting his opposition to the false ease of symmetry in favour of the dynamic equilibrium of true life, for which he sought a pictorial equivalent.
This is one of a series of paintings that Bonnard made of his wife Marthe in the bath. Though she was in her mid-fifties, the artist depicts her as a young woman. Marthe spent many hours in the bathroom: she may have had tuberculosis, for which water therapy was a popular treatment,  or she may have had an obsessive neurosis. The bath, cut off at both ends, and the structure of the wall create a rigorously geometric composition. The effect is strangely lifeless, and almost tomb-like; as if the painting were a silent expression of sorrow for Marthe's plight.
Henry Moore's subject is the aged body. He made these drawings of his own hands when he was eighty-one and suffering from ill-health. 'Hands can convey so much' he said, 'they can beg or refuse, take or give, be open or clenched, show content or anxiety. They can be young or old, beautiful or deformed'.
The title of this painting comes from a passage by John Ruskin, which affirms that Christ is at the helm of every boat. The kneeling woman, comforted by her mother-in-law, realises that her husband is lost at sea, but the open Bible, altar-like table and print on the wall hint at the consolations of religion.
Hepworth became a member of a Paris-based group called Abstraction-Cration in 1933.  As her outlook became increasingly international she experimented more with abstraction, producing multi-part sculptures that reconciled natural forms with abstract shapes.

This work reflects Hepworths experience of motherhood  she carved it while pregnant.  It also shows how she had recently developed a new range of abstract forms by carving holes into her sculptures. The critic Herbert Read thought this a new venture which may succeed in redeeming art from its present triviality and insignificance.
From 1917 Picasso made overt reference to the art  of the ancient world in many of his paintings.  Here the figure's facial features, the soft drapes  of her dress and her apparent composure recall the  grace and naturalism of fifth-century B.C. Greek  sculptures. However, the massiveness of her limbs  and her immobility appear to echo earlier antique  art, or later Roman copies of Greek models. The  ambiguity and potential for irony in this  admixture of references were essential elements in  Picasso's approach to the art of the past. In this  picture the blue sky, as well as the strong light,  evoke the Mediterranean.
Gwen John trained at the Slade School of Art in London. As a woman in a career still largely dominated by men, including her successful brother Augustus, Gwen had to struggle for recognition. It has been suggested that the self-scrutinising intensity of this image, and the isolation of the figure, registers this, but the figure retains its privacy. In recent years, her reputation has grown and now eclipses that of Augustus.
Jazzmen is made from a section of posters and advertisements stripped from the rue de Tolbiac in Paris. Villegl started making works using torn posters in the late 1940s and again in the 1960s. He wanted to emphasise the actions of anonymous passers-by who had torn and stripped the posters, a process that he regarded as a spontaneous art of the street. The title of this work derives from the partially seen guitarists on the left-hand side.
Schwitters made this collage in Norway, shortly after emigrating from Nazi Germany. Among the pieces of rubbish he incorporated are various kinds of wrapping paper and fragments of German and Norwegian newspapers. The title was chosen by the artists son, from a pair of German customs labels included in the work, and stamped with the place and date Hannover 3.8.37. He later explained: my father wanted certain parts of his Collages read and understood, intellectually, and he often made these the actual titles of his works. Usually, they were witty, ironical or even sarcastic.
Cindy Sherman''s Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artist''s earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
Delvauxs work combined classical perfection with an erotic and troubling atmosphere. The sensuousness of Sleeping Venus is set against its oppressive night-time setting. Delvaux later explained that it was painted in Brussels during the German wartime occupation and while the city was being bombed. The psychology of that moment was very exceptional, full of drama and anguish, he recalled. I wanted to express this anguish in the picture, contrasted with the calm of the Venus. Though never an official Surrealist, Delvaux was associated with the Belgian group around Magritte.
In contrast to conventional treatments of this subject, Degas provides little detail in this scene of a woman at her toilette. Instead, he has focused on the formal aspects of the composition. The action of the woman combing her hair is anchored within the rectangle formed by the woman's arms and the table edge. The contrast of the soft form of the active central figure and the heavily outlined shape of the immobile maid generates a visual tension and energy, which is heightened by the rich treatment of the walls and furnishings.
Since the early 1990s Sarah Lucas  has challenged sexual stereotypes in  a variety of provocative works. In this  series of self-portraits she turns against the art-historical tradition of the female seductress or muse, and presents  herself in a deliberately androgynous,  and occasionally aggressive, series of poses. She adopts masculine gestures  and stances, and shows herself in unisex clothing like jeans and T-shirts. These images also raise questions about the  role and appearance of the modern  artist. In contrast to the clich of the  artist as an anguished male, Lucas  shows herself as an ordinary person  in emphatically ordinary surroundings.
The Battle of Waterloo (1815) saw Britain and Prussia defeat France, putting an end to the Napoleonic wars and more than a decade of conflict. Turner visited the battlefield, already a tourist attraction, in 1817. He filled a sketchbook with drawings and notes, and later made studies of soldiers uniforms in preparation for this painting. In it, Turner emphasises wars tragic consequences for all its victims. With the painting he quoted Byrons poem Childe Harolds Pilgrimage, lamenting friend, foe, in one red burial blent!. Many other works by Turner are on display here in the Clore Gallery.
Constable made full-size sketches like this for many of his six-foot paintings. They allowed him to explore his ideas before committing them to the final canvas. The finished picture in this case was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1829. The composition originated in a minute drawing Constable made on a visit to the ruins of Hadleigh Castle in Essex in 1814, but this painting was not developed until around the time of his wifes death in 1828. The resulting image of loneliness and decay is now often seen as exemplifying his desolate state of mind at the time.
Piper was commissioned as a war artist during the Second World War, painting the Home Front. In this capacity he made a series of paintings of bombed buildings, visiting the sites to take photographs and make sketches, which formed the basis for a series of paintings. St Mary le Port was hit in the attacks on Bristol Docks in November 1940.
Arnatt was fascinated with works of art that are created in the natural landscape but leave no trace of their presence behind. The continual reference to the disappearance of the art object suggested to me the eventual disappearance of the artist himself, he wrote. This sequence of photographs was broadcast on German television in October 1969. One photo was shown each day, for about two seconds, sometimes interrupting whatever programme was being shown at peak viewing time. They were neither announced nor explained  viewers had to make what sense of them they could.
Landseer was one of the most popular British painters in the nineteenth century. From the age of thirteen he exhibited drawings of animals at the Royal Academy. He was elected an ARA at the age of twenty-four, becoming an RA five years later. Dignity and Impudence is characteristic of Landseers tendency to give human attributes to animals. Landseer contrasts the large, dignified bloodhound with the small, mischievous terrier. These dogs, Grafton and Scratch were both owned by Landseers friend, Jacob Bell, who  commissioned the painting.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
The objects in this painting appear to be a metal sheet with bells, a paper cut-out and two balusters (Magritte referred to similar objects in his paintings as bilboquets, a French stick and ball game). Their enlargement and conjunction with the landscape creates a feeling of incongruity recalling the experience of dreams. In titling this work The Annunciation, Magritte may have been alluding ironically to the hostility towards Catholicism shown by the French surrealists. But the title also suggests that something is about to happen, an expectation that is central to the eerie quality of this strange landscape.
Brown's picture shows a boat of emigrants as they pass the most westerly cliffs of southern England. This highly topical scene is given an added poignancy by the fact that it was stimulated by the emigration of Thomas Woolner, a fellow Pre-Raphaelite, who left for Australia in July 1852. The focus of the picture is the tragedy of exile for the middle-class couple (modelled by Brown and his wife), a theme reiterated in Brown's writings: 'The educated are bound to their country by quite other ties than the illiterate man, whose chief consideration is food and physical comfort'. This watercolour is a replica of an oil painting now in Birmingham.
This is one of the nocturnes that Whistler painted of Cremorne Gardens, at the west end of Chelsea beside the river Thames.  The gardens were popular as a place of amusement, offering concerts, dancing and, as in this painting, a nightly display of fireworks.  Cremorne was closed in 1877 due to repeated complaints from the neighbourhood about the noise and rowdiness.  Whistlers nocturnes provide a sense of the tranquillity of the Thames at night, and are far removed from the teeming waterfront of the day.
Although many of the Shelter Drawings showed groups of people, some concentrated on individuals. In this 

picture a lone woman sits apart from 

the other shelterers. Swathed in layers 

of clothing, she stares out of the picture, anxiously clasping her hands. This sense 

of tension is heightened by the abrupt jump from foreground to background 

and the network of nervous, scratchy 

lines that describe the figure.
In his annotations to a text by Lavater, Blake claimed that Active Evil is better than Passive Good, rendering the figures in this picture somewhat ambiguous. Perhaps the chain attached to the evil angels ankle suggests the curtailing of energy by misguided rational thought?

In constructing his figures, Blake evokes conventional eighteenth century stereotypes. The heavy build and darker skin of the evil angel suggest a non-European character, described by Lavater as strong, muscular, agile; but dirty, indolent and trifling, while the fair hair and light skin of the good angel are consonant with ideas of physical  and intellectual  perfection.
William Blake's 1821 wood engravings illustrating Robert Thornton's 'Virgil' greatly inspired Palmer. He wrote 'they are visions of little dells, and nooks, and corners of Paradise [with] such a mystic and dreamy glimmer as penetrates...  the inmost soul'. For a few years after Palmer moved to the Kent village of Shoreham in 1826, he found the local landscape perfectly matched these Blakean visions. Blake, too, in a rare  trip out of London once briefly stayed in Shoreham. This work is partly painted in tempera, as were some of Palmer's other Shoreham works. It was also a medium used by Blake.
In Knowing, Craig-Martin has painted meticulously accurate representations of household items that appear at once convincingly real and highly artificial. They are arranged in a formation that seems to recede into the distance. Each object's actual size has been adapted to reinforce that impression. This contradicts what we know to  be true of their relative real sizes, the ladder appearing smaller than the fire extinguisher, which is in turn smaller than the torch.
Photo Booth is made up of fifty photo booth portraits, predominantly depicting black men, and fifty drawings of the same size. The photographs, which Simpson bought in bulk for the work, were taken in the 1940s. She has said, The 40s, in American culture, were a tough time in terms of life, work, Jim Crow laws, segregation and lynchings. And so the nostalgia of how beautiful these portraits are is one thing, but the context of the era is important with respect to what was endured at the time.
This picture tells the story of an upper- middle-class family, forced to sell the ancestral home because of the fecklessness of a spendthrift father. The miniature case in the fathers hand and the sporting print on the left show that he has gambled away his inherited fortune on horseracing. The familys possessions are to be sold  there are lot numbers attached to various objects and theres an auction catalogue on the floor. But only the women appear concerned. The man and his son raise glasses of champagne, implying that the fathers hedonistic habits will pass down to his son.
Gallery label, September 2004
Cicely Alexander, daughter of a London banker, was eight years old when Whistler painted this portrait.  The artist exerted considerable control over the picture, posing the girl in the attitude of Manets Lola de Valence 1862, and designing her dress in detail.

The portrait demanded over 70 sittings each lasting several hours.  Cicely recalled: I used to get very tired and cross, and often finished the day in tears.  Not surprisingly, the picture was criticised for its departure from the more informal formats usually adopted for child portraiture.  One critic called it a disagreeable presentation of a disagreeable young lady.
The title Hyena Stomp comes from a track by the American jazz musician Jelly Roll Morton. Stella was thinking about syncopation while working on the painting.
Gallery label, October 2004
This subject comes from Virgils poem, the Aeneid. The Trojan hero, Aeneas, has come to Cumae to consult the Sibyl, a prophetess. She tells him he can only enter the Underworld to meet the ghost of his father if he offers Proserpine a golden bough cut from a sacred tree.
Lipchitz described works such as this one as 'abstract architectural sculptures'. He wrote that during this period he was 'building up and composing the idea of a human figure from abstract sculptural elements of line, plane and volume'. This indicates that, in spite of its abstraction, the work was based on the upper part of a human figure, seated at a table. Lipchitz would have made an original clay model of the work, which a professional stone-carver would probably copy to produce the final work.
Veil refers to the chador (black veil) worn by Islamic women, and belongs to a series of works called self portraits. Sufi thoughts are inscribed in Arabic using varying strengths of graphite pencil. The surface is of such a delicate nature that the painting is dramatically transformed by different light conditions and defies any attempt to photograph or reproduce it. Houshiary explains we always think we know but yet we really dont know, and black square is a protest against knowing. There is a frustration when you dont see, but then thats when you question.
This sculpture is a plaster mould of the artists body, reinforced with fiber glass and encased in a skin of soldered lead. Gormley uses his own body to examine the physical and spiritual relationships between humankind and the natural world. He says: sculpture, for me, uses the physical as a means to talk about the spirita visual means to refer to things which cannot be seen .
El-Salahi studied painting in Khartoum in the late 1940s, before completing his studies in London. Returning to Khartoum in 1957, he realised that Sudan  a newly independent country in the midst of a civil war  required a different approach. As one of the founders of the Khartoum School, he developed a new visual vocabulary comprising simple forms, strong lines and sombre colours inspired by his environment and rooted in Arabic and African forms and iconography. In this work El-Salahi captures the fleeting, and often dramatic, moments when memory and dreams, past and present collide.
The way in which Bomberg reduces the human figure to a series of geometric shapes may reflect his fascination with the machine age, which he shared with the Futurists and Vorticists. This painting could also represent the human form, stripped to its essential core.The scene is based on steam baths near Bombergs home in east London, which were used by the local Jewish population and which also had religious associations. They were, perhaps, a place for both physical and spiritual cleansing.
Although this unfinished painting has come to be known as Sunrise with Sea Monsters, the obscure pink shape at the lower centre of the canvas probably depicts fish; indeed a red and white float and part of a net can be seen nearby.

Commentators have related the picture to Turners whaling scenes, and other paintings with fish in the foreground from the 1840s. But the subject of fishing was of interest to Turner throughout his career, as were remarkable sunsets and sunrises such as the dawn depicted here.
Mountain Lake demonstrates Dals use of the multiple image: the lake can simultaneously be seen as a fish. By such doubling he sought to challenge rationality. The painting combines personal and public references. His parents visited this lake after the death of their first child, also called Salvador. Dal seems to have been haunted by the death of his namesake brother whom he never knew. The disconnected telephone brings the image into the present by alluding to negotiations between Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, and Hitler over the German annexation of the Sudetenland in September 1938.
This is one of the many paintings Bacon made of his friend, the artist Isabel Rawsthorne. He preferred to base such works on photographs of the subject rather than work from life.Intimate knowledge of the sitter was also essential. What I want to do is to distort the thing far beyond the appearance, but in the distortion to bring it back to a recording of the appearance, he said.
Horn designed Unicorn for a fellow student, whom she associated with the mythical beast, symbol of purity, chastity and innocence. In my early performances, I was very shy. I would focus on one person and try to communicate through the object I had constructed She asked the girl to take part in a performance where she would wear only a harness with a long horn enhancing her elegant posture (footage is included in Performances II 1973). She walked all day through the fields and she was like an apparition.
Gallery label, August 2004
The pottery objects in this painting have been depicted from different viewpoints depending on their situation in the overall composition. Thus those near the bottom of the image are painted as though seen from a point somewhere above, those near the centre appear to be viewed from eye level and those towards the top of the canvas are shown from below. This device emphasises the overall effect of the stacking up of a large number of similar objects. The simple black outlines and strong colours are characteristic of much of Caulfield's work. The artist has written of this painting that it 'was an excuse for me to use a lot of colour'.
This painting relates to Bombergs search for a purely visual language with which to express his perceptions of the modern urban environment. It is based on a scene of dockers working in the hold of a ship. A ladder in the lower right of the picture connects the hold with the deck above. In the centre left one of the dockworkers is seen, wearing a hat. Bomberg has left visible the squaring-up grid, used to enlarge accurately the preliminary drawing. He has then used this geometrical framework to dissolve the subject of the picture into dynamic angular facets.
Vallier was the gardener and odd-job man at Czanne's house near Aix-en-Provence. This is one of six portraits of him, and was probably painted in the summer and autumn of 1906, not long before Czanne's death in October that year. It follows Czanne's method of capturing the exact tone of each element  both the shade of colour and its degree of luminosity  in distinct but overlapping brushstrokes, sometimes reflecting slight shifts in the artists perspective. Czanne's ability to combine such elements into a single, unified composition was a very significant influence on the development of Cubism.
Chagall drew inspiration from the theme of the  circus throughout his life. As a child in Russia,  he had been fascinated by the travelling acrobats  he saw at village fairs. After he moved to Paris,  Ambroise Vollard regularly accompanied him to the  circus, where he would sit in the audience and  sketch. The chaotic and colourful atmosphere of  the circus captivated Chagall. Here, he saw  all aspects of life represented, from the comic to  the tragic. He later said, 'For me a circus is a  magic show that appears and disappears like a  world.' Circus performers, with their outlandish  costumes and garish make-up, were ideal characters  to populate Chagall's dream-like compostions.
Ad Reinhardt's work became increasingly reductive and symmetrical in the 1950's and from 1955 until his death he worked almost exclusively in near-black. In fact the blue-black surface of 'Abstract Painting No. 5' has an underlying grid of different coloured squares divided by a green central horizontal band. Seen from top left, the squares are: red, blue, red, red, blue, red. Each of these colours was mixed with black oil paint to give a matt surface quality.
When I first saw this work in the flesh, it made  the hairs on the back of my neck stand up.  That surprised me, because it seemed such  a slight, almost invisible thing. Manzoni had monumentalised the very fundamental act of breathing, annexing it as art. His charismatic  egoism allowed it to stand in lieu of every  breath he made (few, considering his short life).
Dijkstra decided to make these portraits after witnessing the birth of a friends baby. She photographed three women, one hour (Julie), one day (Tecla) and one week (Saskia) after giving birth. The raw immediacy of these images captures something of the contradictions inherent in this common and yet most singular of human experiences. The women appear at once vulnerable and invincible, traumatised and self-composed.
Grosz was drafted into the German army in 1914, after the outbreak of the First World War. His experiences in the trenches deepened his intense loathing for German society. Discharged from the army for medical reasons, he produced savagely satirical paintings and drawings that expressed my despair, hate and disillusionment. This work shows dogs roaming past the abandoned bodies of suicides in red nocturnal streets. The inclusion of an aged client visiting a prostitute reflects the pervasive moral corruption in Berlin during the war years.
The vast expanse of unmodulated red paint in this work is both absorbing and disorienting. It is interrupted by a single, narrow band of purple running the length of the right-hand edge. This 'zip' generates a tension throughout the canvas between presence and blankness, solidity and fragility. Its verticality also echoes the position of the viewer, helping to fulfil Newman's concern that 'the onlooker in front of my painting knows that he's there'.
Schads Self-Portrait is a study of thinly-veiled display. The artists transparent shirt reveals his chest. He is positioned in front of the woman, but only partially conceals her nakedness. A diaphanous curtain separates them from the city. Schads precise realism is loaded with symbolism. A narcissus, indicating vanity, leans towards the artist. The womans face is scarred with a freggio, inflicted on Neapolitan women by their lovers to make them unattractive to others. It is a startling emblem of the potential violence underlying male possession of the female body.
The twenty-eight 'Cubi' sculptures were the last  series made by Smith before his death in 1965.  They are composed of simple geometric shapes and  relate, as the name suggests, to Cubist painting  and sculpture. In 'Cubi XIX', and a number of  related pieces, the forms on the cross beam are  arranged rather like a still life, though elevated  by the vertical beam. Smith intended the 'Cubi'  works to be shown outside, so that the burnishing  of the stainless steel would reflect changes in  lighting conditions. The geometric forms were  softened by this response to the environment as  Smith anticipated in a note on a sketch: 'polished  - like I feel if I make square clouds'.
One of the most apocalyptic of Nevinson's paintings, Bursting Shell uses the strong lines  and swirling movement of Futurist and Vorticist compositions to recreate the effect of an explosion. The dark shapes, which could be shards of debris  or shadows, fracture what appear to be the bricks and timber of buildings and roads. The strong  focal point of the vortex - with its bright light  and dizzying spiral - simulates the disorientating sensory experience of an explosion.
Working for seven days in a single room in Berlin, Horn devised a series of tasks to perform only for the camera. Most of these focus on the use of mirrors and of other prosthetic tools, expanding the body and turning it into an instrument or mechanical device. In Feathers Dancing on Shoulders, for example, dance moves trigger a system of pulleys, translating them into swinging motions through the feathered body-sculpture also shown in this room.
The Chapman Family Collection comprises 34 wooden carvings, allegedly rare ethnographic objects which the Chapman family had amassed over 70 years from former colonial regions. However, the inauthenticity of the objects becomes clear as closer inspection reveals repeated references to the worlds most famous burger chain, McDonalds. The work appears to comment on modernisms exploitation of so-called primitive art by associating it so strongly with McDonalds, an icon of capitalism. But it also draws attention to the way in which some museums classify ethnographic artefacts, draining them of their sociological and religious function and re-presenting them as aesthetic objects.
Since the late 1960s, Mikhailov has photographed life in and around his home city of Kharkov in the Ukraine. This series of photographs, taken between 1968 and 1975, uses the colour red as a symbolic reminder of the inescapable presence of the Soviet regime. Each image contains something red, reinforcing Mikhailovs suggestion that red was everywhere, permeating every aspect of daily life. The arrangement of the images on the wall is inspired by principles of Russian constructivism which favoured abstract art with straight and diagonal lines.
Choucair is one of the few Lebanese artists of her generation devoted to geometric abstraction. Composition in Blue Module dates from the late 1940s and early 1950s, when she was studying in Paris. Its palette of blues, purple and lighter tones shows the subtle shifts of colour that characterised her early painting. Like many of her paintings, it uses the two basic elements of Islamic design  the straight line and the curve as a starting point to create simple shapes which she duplicates in various combinations and divisions across the picture plane.
The subtitle of this work suggests an embroidery sampler. As demonstrations of needlework skill, samplers combined images and words, often including mottos relating to the domestic context or to feminine virtue. The circular images here reinforce the link, recalling the hoop of an embroidery frame. Simpson refers to this traditionally female form of creativity, highlighting connections with contemporary issues of race and gender to reflect on the cultural status accorded to black women throughout history.
Andre's metal floor sculptures are intended to be walked on. This example is one of a series made between 1967 and 1975, each using a different metal. The 12-inch magnesium squares are arranged into 12 rows of 12, to create a larger square with a total of 144 units. Moving over 

the square brings an awareness of the texture 

of the magnesium plates. Andre accepted that 

the surface of the work would be altered by visitors' footsteps, observing that it 'becomes its own record of everything that's happened to it'.
This is one of the first paintings made of an English stage performance. It depicts a climactic scene from John Gays The Beggars Opera, first performed at the Lincolns Inn Theatre in 1728. Here the operas central character, a highwayman named Macheath, stands chained, under sentence of death, between his two lovers, the jailers daughter, Lucy Lockit, and the lawyers daughter, Polly Peachum. At either side of the stage Hogarth has included members of the audience, notably at the far right the Duke of Bolton, real-life lover of the actress Lavinia Fenton, who played the part of Polly Peachum.
Horn has described how wearing these gloves altered her relationship with her surroundings, so that distant objects came within her reach: the finger gloves are light. I can move them without any effort. Feel, touch, grasp anything, but keeping a certain distance from the objects. The lever-action of the lengthened fingers intensifies the various sense-data of the hand; [...] I feel me touching, I see me grasping, I control the distance between me and the objects.
War was inspired by a news photograph taken during the recent Iraq war. A close-up of a young girls face dominated almost half of the photograph, while a woman in the background held her child stoically. Rego transformed the original image, using a cast of rabbits and other hybrid creatures. As in Regos earlier pastels, such figures hark back to a subversive and psychologically troubling tradition of folk tales and fairy tales that explore themes of violence and sexuality..
Horn is fascinated by ambiguity and processes of change. Pink Tons is an imposingly solid presence in the gallery. Yet its appearance is continually changing, as the natural light that passes through it varies in intensity at different times of day. The sides are rough-edged, having been in contact with the surface of the mould. By contrast their top surfaces are highly reflective since here the glass has only been in contact with air during the casting process.
Vorticism was a short-lived but radical movement founded by Lewis in London just before the First World War, proposing an art suited to the energy of the modern world. Here, Lewis uses angles and diagonals to suggest the geometry of modern buildings. Its harsh colours and lines echo the discordant vitality of the modern city in an attack on traditional harmony. The vorticists aggressive rhetoric, angular style and focus on modernity linked them to the Italian futurists. War demonstrated the devastating reality of pitting men against machines and Lewiss attempts to revive the movement in 1919 came to nothing.
In the prospectus for his book, Varley announced his intention to include an engraving of Blakes Nebuchadnezzar. This was never completed but, as with Ghost of a Flea, Varley may have been interested in the transformation of man into beast. The Bible describes how King Nebuchadnezzar was driven mad and forced to live like a wild animal as punishment for excessive pride. The association between moral corruption and bestial appearance is also suggested by Lavater, who traces a scale of perfection from the head of a frog to the face of Apollo (see the nearby panel).
In the 1880s popular music halls sprang up in London and Paris and impressionist artists such as Edgar Degas and Walter Sickert began to paint the audiences and acts. Minnie Cunningham was a successful performer whom Sickert admired. He first exhibited this picture with the subtitle Im an old hand at love, though Im young in years, a quotation from one of her songs. Sickert gives us the point of view of an audience member and catches the strange effect of theatrical lighting.
Turners first painting of Petworth, a palatial country house and estate inland from Chichester in West Sussex, was made following a visit in 1809. Its owner, the Earl of Egremont, supported contemporary artists and had already begun a major collection of Turners paintings. He stayed at Petworth again in 1827 and often until the Earls death in 1837, even being allocated a room for his studio. He began work on four paintings on a double-square format for specific positions in Petworths Carved Room, looking out towards the lake. These are three of the studies he made for the series.
Like a number of his contemporaries, Manzoni wanted to banish narrative content from painting. For Manzoni, this meant removing even colour from his works. In 1957, he began to produce the achromes, which he described as a single uninterrupted and continuous surface from which anything superfluous and all interpretative possibilities are excluded. He began by soaking his canvases in kaolin, a soft china clay used in making porcelain. The kaolin eliminated colour to the point of his desired nothingness. The weight of the material caused it to sag, creating folds across the surface of the canvas.
Czanne was preoccupied with still life, and painted the same objects over and over again. His concentrated study of familiar items enabled him to develop a new way of capturing his visual sensations. He believed that conventional perspective, which uses a single viewpoint, did not accurately reflect the way that we perceive the world. In this painting, he combined several viewpoints of the fat-bellied jug and fruit. Like many of his works, it was left unfinished.
This work belongs to a series of paintings that Mir made in 194950 in Majorca. Mirs use of simple shapes and bright colours constitutes a highly personal visual language, often charged with symbolic meaning. In this case, the women and bird of the title are easily identifiable under the moon and stars. This imagery suggests a harmonious and elemental relationship between man and nature, which the artist felt was threatened by modern civilisation.
An odd tension exists between the barman, the customer and the slicing of the ham inBurras painting. The woman eats distractedly, while the man cuts with enjoyment and asideways glance at her. Violence and sexual tension seem to be at play. Burra was an acuteobserver of the everyday, often exaggerating it into caricature in order to comment onsociety. He was familiar with the similarly critical work of German artist Georg Grosz andthe heightened atmosphere of surrealist painting, contributing works to the 1936 International Surrealist Exhibition in London.
Heron first made his name as a critic but by 1956 was well established as a painter. Inspired by his Cornish garden, Heron painted this picture during a period when he saw himself moving from representational art to abstraction. He recalled: I referred to the series as garden paintings, since they certainly related in my mind to the extraordinary effervescence of flowering azaleas and camellias which was erupting all over the garden. Though he regarded the formal qualities of a painting as paramount, he also believed in the importance of subject matter.
What I do, Currin has said, is to find a clich and try to believe in it. His work rejects the decorous conventions of the female nude by melding art-historical references with the fantasies of advertising and pornography. The womans body and pose in Honeymoon Nude recall Renaissance prototypes (especially Botticellis Birth of Venus) but she has a recognisably contemporary face. Currin presents the female nude as a commodity, the embodiment of male fantasy. As if emphasising the narcissistic aspects of desire, he bases the womans face on his own self-portrait.
A major theme in Beuys's work was renewal. This sculpture developed out of his environmental concerns, particularly a plan to plant 7,000 oaks in the city of Kassel, Germany. Next to each newly planted tree would be placed blocks of basalt rock. Here, the basalt itself becomes a symbol of potential growth. A cone has been cut out of each rock, allowing the cavity to be lined with clay and felt. Embedded in dead matter, these materials suggest the possibility of new life emerging at the end of a dark century.
This video installation draws upon the most significant television images of Richard Nixons presidency, from his inaugural address in 1969 to his resignation speech following the Watergate scandal in 1974. Magnetic coils attached to the screens cause the image to jump and warp, disrupting the footage. By subverting the broadcast material, Paik transforms television into a two-way, participatory medium. The choice of Nixon as subject underlines the authoritarian and manipulative nature of the state-controlled broadcast image. The installation was conceived by Paik in 1965, and realised in its current form in 2002.
After the 'veil' paintings (see 'VAV' in this room), Louis developed his pouring technique in a series of works known as the 'unfurleds'. 'Alpha-Phi' belongs to this series. In these works Louis poured lines of pure colour across the bottom corners of the painting, leaving the centre bare. This became known as the 'one-shot' technique because the artist had only one attempt at a successful pour. If the line went astray there was no second chance. These lines stress the painting's flatness, leading the eye across and out of its surface. This again denies any reading of the painting as an image to be looked into, and insists on its reality as non-representative object.
Cindy Sherman''s Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artist''s earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
Instead of presenting the single vantage point of traditional painting, Braque and Picasso fragmented the object into a series of geometric facets and planes, which imitate the darting, fleeting nature of sight. In this painting, the glass and pears on a table appear obscured by the scaffolding of vertical, horizontal and curvilinear forms. Braque believed that it was only by breaking up the picture plane that he could get closer to a true depiction of the object.
This industrial landscape contains many features typical of Lowrys work: smoking chimneys, terraced houses, the Stockport Viaduct, and figures swarming through the citys streets and open spaces. Though seen as a realist, Lowrys works were largely composed from a variety of repeated motifs, becoming increasingly nostalgic as time went on. The artist said, I hadnt the slightest idea of whatI was going to put in the canvas when I started the picture but it eventually came out as you see it. This is the way I like working best.
In spite of the title, the figure in this painting appears to have been originally intended as a man. The male genitalia were covered over with a thin layer of paint. Unusually, the figure was cut from another canvas and pasted onto this one, on which the background was painted. Male nudes appeared in many of Bacon's paintings. He may have accepted the misidentification of this figure as a way of disguising its implicitly homoerotic imagery at a time when homosexuality was illegal.
Conceptual art became a dominant movement in the 1970s as artists rejected traditional practices for an art that reflected upon the protocols of art itself. For many conceptual artists, the grid functions as rigorous scaffolding for the expressions of basic ideas, articulated with or without limited aesthetic intervention. The idea of a camera examining itself might be seen to epitomise such a practice. Here the camera serves as a device as well as the central image; 70 photographs were taken using mirrors and combinations of aperture and shutter speed.
Gallery label, August 2004
Throughout his life Rossetti was fascinated by stories of tragic lovers and illicit love. Here he illustrates the story of Francesca and her brother-in-law Paolo, from Inferno by the medieval poet Dante. They are condemned to Hell for adultery, although Dante has sympathy for their true love  and the cruelty of their death.
During the 1980s, Milroy made a number of paintings of objects neatly positioned against a neutral background. The arrangement of the light bulbs in this 

work suggests a deliberate categorisation, bringing out numerous differences between apparently similar designs. Yet the purpose of this careful presentation remains a mystery. Removed from any context or hint of their purpose, they appear simply as commodities, perhaps reflecting a concern with mass-production and consumerism.
This heavily pregnant woman may be a member of the Constable family of Everingham, Yorkshire. Her right hand rests protectively over her bump. Her fashionably white skin is emphasised by the black cord wound round one wrist, and the black ribbon round her other wrist. Each is threaded with a ring, probably worn in memory of a dead relative or friend. The artist, Gheeraerts, was born in Bruges. His father, also an artist, brought him to London in 1568, to escape religious persecution in the Catholic Spanish Netherlands. In England, the younger Gheeraerts became the leading portrait-painter of his generation.
Michael Andrews was one of the leading British painters of the post-war period. With Francis Bacon, Frank Auerbach, Lucian Freud and Leon Kossoff he was a member of the so-called 'School of London'. In common with them the process of painting was central to Andrews's art. Typically his paintings evolved from real elements, such as photographs of people and places, together with his memories of them. These were then developed imaginatively through engagement with the paint itself. This painting of the artist and his daughter is based on a photograph of them swimming together. Andrews developed this image so that it also refers metaphorically to Melanie's transition from family life to society.
Rists videos and installations often combine performance, dance, drawing, painting, and sculpture. The title of this work is adapted from the opening line of the Beatles song Happiness is a Warm Gun, Shes not a girl who misses much. Performing with manic energy, Rist repeatedly sings her version of the line. However, the video is deliberately subject to distortion effects and speeded-up, leaving her voice sounding as though she had just inhaled helium. Rist presents a response to the erotic metaphor of the original song, as seen through the visual language of MTV.
These two works show Klees great imaginative and technical versatility. In The Castle of Mountain S, the mysterious castle seems to have emerged from the artists process of heavily working the paint. The freer process of taking a line for a walk animates Burdened Children showing the spontaneity that Klee associated with childhood.
Brothers Jake and Dinos Chapman have been a vital, if controversial force in British art of the 1990s. Disasters of War was their first major collaborative project. It is characteristic of their confrontational and visceral approach to themes such as death, violence and sexuality. Gruesomely detailed, it is  a three-dimensional reworking of Disasters of War,1810-13, a portfolio of etchings by Spanish artist, Francisco Goya (1746-1828). The toy-like scale of the Chapmans' work at first appears to undermine the epic notion of war, yet in fact gives a strange intensity to the horrors of battle.
A view at Auvers-sur-Oise, a small town just north of Paris. Van Gogh spent the last few months of his life there, from mid-May 1890, when he left an asylum, to his death on 29 July. At the beginning of June, Van Gogh wrote to his sister: 'there are some roofs of mossy thatch here which are superb and of which I shall certainly make something'. This picture, which is unfinished, was probably begun soon afterwards. Painted direct from the motif, it shows how Van Gogh transformed what he saw into something entirely personal, using a vigorous brushwork and curving outlines to express an unsettling vitality and energy.
In the mid-1920s de Chirico reworked many of the themes of his pre-war paintings in the light of his interest in the art of the old masters. In contrast to their pre-war counterparts, the mannequins in this work have a flesh-like solidity, while their grouping echoes traditional scenes of the Holy Family. The easel and painting stick appear to refer to the artist's belief in the importance of old-fashioned technical skills. However, de Chirico's attitude towards tradition and the past was always ambiguous and ironic. The building fragments that emerge from the mannequins' stomachs, for example, seem vaguely classical but also suggest a child's building blocks.
Since the late 1970s, Linder has been making work rooted in feminist politics using photography, printmaking and performance. However, she is probably best known for her collages, influenced both by artists such as John Heartfield and by the transgressive sensibilities of the British punk scene in which Linder was immersed. Subverting a banal advertising shot of a couple embracing, the woman in this collage appears to be using an oversized fork to gouge out her eyes. The jarring image suggests a darker side to the fantasy of a picture-perfect romance.
This work was made in Paris and took one year to carve. The current title is an archaic form of John and may refer to John the Baptist. It was once known as Alles, which in German can mean all people. It has been suggested that in such works Moody fused several ethnic types to produce an image of a universal humanity. The pose recalls ancient Egyptian sculptures. However, one critic has also proposed that Johanaan falls somewhere between the work of the modern artist Jacob Epstein and the monumental figures on Easter Island.
Though based in Britain from 1870, Roussel was French, and this composition shows a debt to the fashion for Oriental art that swept France in the 1860s. The nude model, Hetty Pettigrew, provides the key element in Roussel's bold pictorial design. Her diagonal placing effectively cuts the square canvas in half, creating equal areas of light and dark. Roussel uses naturalistically painted detail  to decorative effect. The luminosity of the model's skin tone is echoed by the peach fabric of the kimono, and is dramatically opposed to the  blackness of the setting. In the opinion of Roussel's contemporary, the painter Sir William Orpen, this  was the finest nude painting of his time.
This painting seems to have been used as an overdoor, hung with two other pictures by Stubbs above the doors in the dining room of George Brodrick, 3rd Viscount Midleton, MP (173065). Reflecting the ornamental use to which this painting was to be put, it seems that Stubbs, the premier animal painter of his day, did not set out to be especially original. The figures of the horses are the same as those appearing in another painting, a commission for Lord Rockingham representing specific horses owned by him, although the colour of one has been changed from brown to grey.
Although seemingly abstract, Hodgkin's paintings are rooted in everyday

reality. He has stated;I start out with the subject and naturally. 'I have to remember first of all

what it looked like, but it would also perhaps contain a great deal of feeling

and sentiment. All of that has got to be somehow transmuted, transformed or

made, into a physical object; Rain is one of his largest paintings, and suggests a landscape viewed

through a window, with lowering storm clouds and squalls shafting down.
These delicate, watery images are distinctly sexual in appearance, though the shapes occurred by chance. Although body parts are suggestive, the title actually derives from the medium with which the works have been made. Describing the process, Parker says: I dissolved pornographic video tapes in solvent and made Rorschach blots with the stain. The video tapes were shredded by the Customs and Excise who decide what should be taken out of circulation. Im making you look at them again but theyve become an abstraction...I just dropped these blots of ink onto paper and folded it. I didnt dictate what images appeared.
The 'K' in the title of K VII stands for the German word Konstruktion (construction), and the painting's ordered, geometrical forms are typical of Moholy-Nagys technocratic Utopianism. The year after it was painted, he was appointed to teach the one year-preliminary course at the recently founded Bauhaus in Weimar. Moholy-Nagys appointment signalled a major shift in the schools philosophy away from its earlier crafts ethos towards a closer alignment with the demands of modern industry, and a programme of simple design and unadorned functionalism.
According to the artist, this picture was begun in  the mid-1930s, when he was living in Paris and  painting a number of still lifes of flowers. He  worked on it at intervals over a period of many  years, and the present composition is the  final state of three or four. In it two  lovers hover behind the dominating vase of  flowers, while an angel flies in through the  window. To the right is a glimpse of the village  of Vitebsk in Russia, where the artist was born.  The painting appears to evoke an atmosphere of  happiness, but the artist said that it expressed  feelings of loss and nostalgia: his wife Bella had  died shortly before the final repainting of the  work, and he was passing through a period of  mourning.
In the artist's open hand is a sculpture made from sections of his own skin. These were removed when he was 

having treatment for sickle cell anaemia.
The foundations of Pop Art in America were laid during the 1950s by Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg. Like Blake, both these artists incorporated images taken from popular culture into a fine art context, and Blake has acknowledged their example. This work refers to Johns's work in particular. Whereas Johns had taken a familiar object - a target - and executed this motif on the canvas in a painterly style, Blake took this further by using a real archery target purchased from a sports shop. The work of art is consequently less like a painting and is even closer to the real world. Blake thus questions: is this 'the first real target'?
Danby made his name with epic subjects, often on a large scale. This was his last. The subject is from the Old Testament book of Genesis. God sends a flood to punish mankinds wickedness but allows Noah and his family to be saved. Noahs ark is in the background, illuminated by a shaft of moonlight. A stormy sea rages round a rocky peak and massive tree branches, to which humans and animals are clinging desperately. A blood-red sun can be seen setting to the left. In the lower right hand corner, an angel weeps over the death of a child.
Cumulus is comprised of glass vessels that have been sandblasted to a milky translucent finish. Their surfaces suggest the slow process of erosion, accelerated here by the use of modern technology.  Each level of vases, bottles and bowls appears to support the glass shelf above. In fact, the shelves are supported by square glass bricks that form the central core of the sculpture.Cumulus is an accumulation, a word describing much of Cragg's sculptural practice. He is known for collecting and arranging found objects, with references to geology and archaeology, past and present, nature and culture.
Hacker was one of a generation of British artists who trained in Paris. Here he developed a style that harmonised plein air realism with academic idealism. His art was also influenced by his travels in Spain and Morocco as indicated by the lighting and setting of this painting. The subject derives from the 2nd century Protevangelium of James which describes Mary receiving the Annunciation from an invisible angel while gathering water from a well. Infra-red photography reveals that the composition originally featured a woman wearing a headscarf seated, behind Mary, at the lower left.
This is one of a series based on the life mask of poet and painter William Blake. Bacon first saw the mask at the National Portrait Gallery in London, but he also used photographs and, at some point, he even acquired a cast of it. His response to the source is typical of his preference for a mediated image of the body. The painting is more complex than it seems: it is built up with delicate layers of paint against a rich black ground. One commentator wrote, broad strokes of pink and mauve, with which Bacon establishes an equivocation between waxen mask and human flesh, drag pain and loneliness and imperturbable spirit in their wake.
Dora Maar was a painter who exhibited with the Surrealist group, before becoming a photographer and reporter. She was Picasso's mistress in the late 1930s and the war years, and one of his most important models during that period. A formidable personality, she was instrumental in encouraging Picasso's political awareness. He also admitted to being somewhat afraid of her. This work shows Dora as a smart, independent French woman, with her hands crossed elegantly in her lap.
After the suffering of the Second World War, Picasso made a number of monochromatic works concerned with atrocities in the Korean War. He also painted four versions of this still-life subject, whose inspiration appears to have been the execution of the Communist partisan Nikos Beloyannis by the Greek government. The grey tones establish the sombre mood, while the candle and skull are traditional reminders of death. His willingness to take a moral stand reinforced Picasso's status as the most influential artist of his generation.
Light slips through a venetian blind, casting a shadow from the wine glass onto the small table. The illusionistic appearance of the blind contrasts with the real newspaper, which Gris incorporated into the work. Le Socialiste des Pyrnes-Orientales was local to Collioure, a fishing town where he stayed in the summer of 1914. Gris may have included it to express his political allegiances.
In the 1920s and 1930s Arp developed a type of biomorphic sculpture that suggested a parallel between artistic creativity and creation in nature. The shapes in his work evoke worn pebbles, buds and other natural forms. He created these sculptures using a quasi-automatic process of sanding away at a plaster model until he was satisfied with the shape. I work until enough of my life has flowed into its body, he said. His efforts to link his work with nature included placing sculptures in the forest near his home at Meudon, where they could be discovered by unsuspecting passers-by.
Li Yuan-Chia arrived in London in the early 1960s. Considered one of the founding fathers of abstract art in Taiwan, his work combined aspects of Western and Eastern thought. He used the bare language and spatial freedom of abstraction to convey existential conditions, focusing on the situation of the individual in the universe. The surface of Monochrome White Painting includes Li Yuan-Chias most personal visual mark: the dot or circular form, which for him symbolised the beginning and end of all things.
When this work was first exhibited a reviewer commented: It resembles a Channel steamer after a violent collision with a pier. You detect funnels, smoke, gangplanks, distant hotels, numbers, posters all thrown into the melting-pot, so to speak. Mr. Nevinson acted as interpreter, explaining that it represented a state of simultaneous mind. Nevinson co-wrote Vital English Art: A Futurist Manifesto. He was fascinated by the idea of simultaneity. This is shown here in his attempt to capture in one composition the many views and movements in a single moment.
The series of photographs called Signs... brought Wearing international recognition when it was first exhibited in 1993. This selection of five images shows the range of responses which Wearing elicited  from passers-by, whom she selected  at random, and asked to write their thoughts on a piece of paper. Wearing challenges social stereotypes and assumptions, and often works in collaboration with members of the  public as a means of 'interrupting the logic of photo-documentary and snapshot photography.' She has said 'A great  deal of my work is about questioning handed-down truths.'
In new year 1826 Constable joined his family at Brighton and stayed for a fortnight. This bold study is one of only two paintings he made during this visit. It is also one of the very few oil sketches he executed outdoors in winter. On an earlier visit to Brighton in 1824, Constable had admired the magnificence of the sea and he was attracted especially by the breakers and the sky. He later wrote how seabirds - some of which are included here - add to the wildness and to the sentiment of melancholy always attendant on the ocean.
This work belongs to a series of paintings and sculptures, known collectively as the Hostages, made in 19435. Fautrier spent most of this period in a sanatorium on the outskirts of Paris. At night, he could hear the Gestapo torture and execute prisoners in the nearby woods. The pitted and scarred surface of Head of a Hostage suggests both individual features and the anonymity of bodies found in mass graves. Versions of the piece exist in bronze, but this cast is made from lead, carrying with it connotations of weight, toxicity and mortality.
Gallery label, September 2004
Giacometti frequently used his brother Diego as a model. The artist regarded each sitting as a new experience, stating When he poses for me I dont recognise him. Nonetheless, his observations deepened over the years and were condensed into images of great intensity, especially in the late 1950s. The dark background of this work increases the looming quality of the head, which is sombre, isolated and perhaps apprehensive.
Gallery label, September 2004
Modigliani was encouraged to sculpt by Brancusi. He made about thirty stone carvings before poverty and ill-health forced him to stop. These were mostly heads, of which this is one of the largest. Seven were shown as a 'decorative ensemble' in 1912, and Epstein later recalled that Modigliani would place candles on them, achieving the effect of 'a primitive temple'. Modigliani eclectically borrowed from African masks, medieval carving and Khmer sculptures. These sources seem to have represented the spiritual expression that he sought to achieve.
This was the first work by Pablo Picasso to be bought by the Tate Gallery. It was acquired in 1933 with the help of the Contemporary Art Society, a fund established in 1910 to help public museums and galleries buy important works of art. This surprising flower painting by Picasso reveals a lot about the tastes of the Tate Gallery Trustees in the early twentieth century. In 1933 Picasso was already an established avant-garde artist, but the decision to buy this conservative early work shows that the Trustees were resisting the more radical developments in modern art.
Pollock was beginning to find his own individual style when he made this work. The startlingly violent image of three interlocking figures was derived from a lost work by the Mexican painter Jos Clemente Orozco showing the fraternal struggle between Cain and Abel. Pollocks exploration of the theme may reflect his interest in the archetypal myths explored in Jungian psychoanalysis. The subject may also refer to the Spanish Civil War and the Second World War, which engulfed Europe as America looked on with horror.
James Hervey (1714-58) was a writer of devotional texts. His popular Meditations Among the Tombs was published in 1746 and it was often reprinted. The subject of the book is death, and the author dwells particularly on the grief caused by early death, and on the eventual re-uniting of the parted in heaven. Hervey, his back to the viewer, is seen in the foreground of the picture. At the foot of the stair which winds heavenward to God, sits a widow with the bodies of her husband and children. Inscriptions beside the other figures help to explain the narrative.The design of this complex arrangement is similar to that of the celebrated painting of the Last Judgement in the Sistine Chapel in Rome by Michelango, an artist Blake admired.
While living in Paris between 1910 and 1914 Chagall made many works based on nostalgic memories of his Russian homeland. The nave style and curious subject of this painting reflect the artists preoccupation with folk traditions, particularly those of his Jewish heritage. At one time known as Village Scene, the colouring and strange arrangement of figures evoke a fantastical scene. While this may relate to a folk tale, no specific narrative for the green donkey has been identified.
During the Second World War Sam Francis served as  a pilot with the American armed forces. He took  up painting while recovering from a flying  accident in 1944. From 1950-7 he lived in Paris,  where he saw first-hand the paintings of Monet,  Matisse, Czanne and Bonnard. In September 1956 he  visited an exhibition of Monet's 'Water Lilies',  paintings which had aroused his interest for some  time and which had an impact on his work. For  Francis each colour has a symbolic value: white  corresponds to the infinite, blue to the cosmos  and water, and yellow to the sun. His experience  as a pilot has a bearing on paintings such as this  one, which have the appearance of aerial views and  communicate the silence of the skies.
Bruce Naumans performances, films and video works often use language games and repetition to explore the nature of language and perception. In this work two monitors are placed at head height, so that the performers stare out directly at the viewer. Two professional actors recite the same series of one hundred phrases, beginning in a flat tone but becoming more emotional. Because they are talking at different speeds, the actors fall out of step with each other, and the continuously looped videos become out of sequence. Many of the statements imply moral judgements which, through repetition, seem increasingly threatening.
This is a re-creation of an obscure and scandalous incident from the history of the Popes. In 1501 the illegitimate daughter of Pope Alexander VI, Lucrezia Borgia, took his place at a meeting. Frank Cowper has invented this suggestive moment in which two noblemen part Lucrezias dress so that a Francisan friar can kiss her shoe.The room in the Vatican in which Lucrezia Borgia appeared still exists. It was decorated by the Italian Renaissance artist Pinturrichio. Cowper went there to copy it and painted the faces of the Cardinals from their original portraits.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
In her earlier photographic works, Sherman had explored the depiction of female stereotypes in Hollywood cinema, transforming herself into a number of different characters. Her Fashion series, to which this photograph belongs, may be seen as a satire on the idealised notion of woman proposed by the fashion industry. The makeup Sherman used here has a theatrical, exaggerated quality to it, and evokes a sense of misery at odds with the richness of her costume. Her turban refers to the contrived ethnic themes often used to give fashion shoots a certain exotic character.
This painting is thought to be based on a photograph of Bacons lover Eric Hall wearing a flannel suit dozing on a seat in Hyde Park. A substantial section of the body has been overpainted, suggesting a black void. An open mouth can be discerned speaking into microphone, a detail that may have derived from photographs of Nazi leaders giving speeches. The pastoral setting is therefore contrasted with the intimations of organised political violence, making this an early example of Bacons combination of aggression and everyday mundane reality.
Gallery label, September 2004
Not long after making this work, Nash wrote an essay entitled Aerial Flowers in which he discussed his long fascination with flight, from the imagined flight of childhood dreams to actual experience in an aeroplane. He also described how his view of the sky changed with the threat of aerial bombing during the war. Rose of Death, his first picture of the war, was of a parachute. Perhaps this image of clouds metamorphosing into a white magnolia flower relates to the expected end of the war. As a spiritual symbol it recalls the imagery of William Blake.
Vieira da Silva was a key figure within the field of expressive abstraction in post-war Paris. However her work always retained a strong basis of reference to the visible world. Many of her paintings depict labyrinthine interior spaces, with complex or multiple lines of perspective. The elaborate mosaic and tiled surfaces recall the domestic architecture of her native Portugal. This picture was first exhibited in 1950 as The Corridor, but later became known as The Grey Room.
Burra often combines the macabre with the humourous: these skeletons dance in tarts'  hats, as if in a music hall. Though such works  have been seen in terms of child-like fantasy,  they also reveal the artist's interest in the satirical paintings of the German artist George Grosz.  The vigour of the deathly dance is made chillingly absurd by the decay around the skeletons. The scene is full of references to death, not least  the dangling figures silhouetted against the  sky, which recall photographs of hanged rebels  in Africa which Burra saw in the Belgian cultural magazine Varits.
John Milton's great poems Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained particularly appealed to Romantic artists, who often explored dreams and the supernatural as an expression of the depths of the individual imagination. This painting illustrates lines from Paradise Lost which speak of
Bacons portraits are explorations of the human condition as much as they are character studies, particularly in works such as Seated Figure, in which the identity of the sitter is not disclosed. They also represent a complex exploration of pictorial space: the figure is simultaneously posed among some elegant items of furniture and confined within a box-like frame. This device, which was one of Bacons trademarks, underlines the sense of isolation as well as generating a claustrophobic psychological intensity.
Tuke studied the tradition of the nude in Italy, but interpreted it with a modern impressionist style and everyday subjects. He moved to Cornwall and helped found the Newlyn School. This is one of many pictures Tuke painted of boys bathing around Falmouth Harbour; an activity that was common at this time. Tuke idealises the scene, however, with the poetic title (from Algernon Swinburnes poem The Sundew 1866), reflecting the beautiful colour that dominates the composition.
While working in Paris Brancusi retained a strong association with the traditions of his native country, Romania: Maiastra exemplifies this inspiration. The polished form evokes a golden bird with miraculous powers, which featured in Romanian folk tales. The carved bird-like forms of the stone base relate to more rustic folk decoration. Emphasising an idealised connection with nature, Brancusi originally set the whole sculpture on a high wooden column in the garden of its first owner, the photographer Edward Steichen.
The series of photographs called Signs... brought Wearing international recognition when it was first exhibited in 1993. This selection of five images shows the range of responses which Wearing elicited  from passers-by, whom she selected  at random, and asked to write their thoughts on a piece of paper. Wearing challenges social stereotypes and assumptions, and often works in collaboration with members of the  public as a means of 'interrupting the logic of photo-documentary and snapshot photography.' She has said 'A great  deal of my work is about questioning handed-down truths.'
Van Doesburg was the editor of De Stijl magazine and its combination of art, architecture and design reflected his own wide-ranging activities. He painted his first Counter-Composition in 1924, using a diagonal grid to create a dynamic tension between the composition and the rectilinear format of the canvas. For van Doesburg, the shift marked a spiritual liberation from the earth-bound verticals and horizontals used by the De Stijl group.
This painting shows the head of five-year-old Lady Frances Gordon from five different angles. Reynolds took the idea from 17th-century Italian painting: in seeking to elevate the genre of portraiture he would borrow motifs or styles from the most admired art of the past. Critics praised Reynoldss artistic ability. One claimed that, The hand of nature never formed a finer face than this: not like the general run  of cherubims, with ruddy cheeks and round unmeaning faces, but sentiment, expression, and clearness, and warmth of colouring, that all must feel, but which the President of the Royal Academy alone can describe.
Bell was one of the first British artists to experiment with abstraction. In the early 1910s her approach to painting was radicalised by a series of exhibitions curated by her friend Roger Fry, in which works by Czanne, Gauguin, Picasso and Matisse were seen in London for the first time. Responding to such examples, her compositions became more simplified, her use of colour more vibrant. During this period she also made a small number of wholly abstract paintings like this one, characterised by blocks of bold colour.
'E.O.W.' - Estella (Stella) West - began posing regularly for Auerbach in the early 1950s, and continued to do so until 1973. By then he had completed about 80 drawings and paintings of her. This drawing was made entirely from life and took almost 70 sittings. In line with his usual practice, Auerbach constantly drew, erased and reworked the image. The final image is therefore built upon numerous previous attempts. In this way the portrait is saturated with the artist's accumulated experience of the model. As a result of this long process the paper became torn and abraded and necessitated the patch visible in the drawing.
Swan upping, when the swans are marked, is an annual ritual on the Thames. Spencer said this work was inspired while he was in church and could hear people on the river outside. He explained: the village seemed as much a part of the atmosphere prevalent in the church as the most holy part of the church. This fusion of the everyday and the divine was typical of his attitude to his Christian faith. The completion of this work was delayed by Spencers involvement in the First World War. He had trouble when he returned to it, as he said it is not proper or sensible to expect to paint after such experience.
Cahun visited the British Museum while in London for the International Surrealist Exhibition in 1936. The two-headed serpent sculpture in embodies the ideas of doubling, reflection and narcissism that run through the artists photographs. Cahuns head is visible at the same size as the crystal skull on the upper left, and is similarly pale against the darker tones of all the other artefacts. The artists use of the plural in the title suggests that she intended the viewer to read her face as a second crystal head.
Gallery label, November 2004
Turner made close observation of the ships shown here, but the painting of the battle in which Admiral Nelson died is not simply detailed reportage. Sails and cannon smoke arrest the eye, creating a claustrophobic backdrop, while the action appears to thrust outwards. The viewer is confronted by both the chaos of battle and the intimate tragedy of Nelsons final moments. A contemporary reviewer termed this a British epic picture...the first picture of the kind that has ever...been exhibited.
Sickert wanted to show the naked female form without idealisation. This is one of several paintings showing a naked woman in poor surroundings: on an iron bed in a dimly-lit room. The painting does not reveal the womans identity, but the title (The Dutch Girl) may refer to the nickname of a prostitute in a novel by the 19th-century French author, Honor de Balzac. The seedy feeling of the painting is reinforced by Sickerts handling. The brush marks form a surface so rough that, if you look at it closely, the image seems to fragment.
This series of prints is based on a game called Exquisite Corpse, a version of Consequences which was developed by the Surrealists. The players take turns to draw part of a body onto a piece of paper, which has been folded horizontally to hide what the other players have drawn. The result is a body of composite parts. These etchings feature comic-horror imagery typical of the Chapmans work: skulls, eyeballs on stalks, grotesque animal heads, liquids dripping and spurting from wounds, orifices, nipples and heads, writhing intestines, and claw-like hands and feet.
The 12-year-old St Eulalia was martyred in the fourth century for refusing to make sacrifices to the Roman gods. Two executioners tore her body with iron hooks, and held flames to her breasts and sides until she was suffocated by the smoke. According to the account given by the Spanish poet Prudentius, which Waterhouse quoted in the exhibition catalogue, a white dove emerged from Eulalias mouth at the moment of her death and a miraculous fall of snow descended. The composition is very daring with dramatic foreshortening for the figure and snow contrasting with Eulalias naked flesh.
Felt Suit was tailored from one of Beuyss own suits, and can be seen as an oblique self-portrait. Although it was intended as a work to be hung from the gallery wall, he did wear one of the suits in a performance in the early 1970s. For Beuys, the suit was an extension of his felt sculptures, in which the felt appeared as an element of warmth. He explained: Not even physical warmth is meant... Actually I meant a completely different kind of warmth, namely spiritual or evolutionary warmth or the beginning of an evolution.
This horrific vision of urban sprawl was inspired by Kiefers visit to Sao Paulo in Brazil. Tangled copper wiring signals the breakdown of communication. The city is engulfed in an apocalyptic haze, which Kiefer created by spreading dust and earth across the painting, then burning parts of its surface. According to Hebrew mythology, Lilith was Adams first wife, a seductive and demonic airborne spirit. In Kiefers painting, Lilith seems to bring destruction from the air upon Oscar Niemeyers modernist buildings.
Knights was one of several British artists who participated in a revival of religious imagery  in the 1920s, while retaining some elements  of a modern style. The theme of this work is the  Old Testament Flood. In the foreground, people flee the rising waters towards the high ground, while Noah's ark floats calmly in the distance  to the right. The frequent use of the word  'deluge' as a metaphor for the all-engulfing  First World War would have given the painting  a contemporary resonance.
These photos were taken by the artist John Coplans of his own gnarled and wrinkled body.
Australian born, Ron Mueck first came to public attention during the Royal Academy's 1997 Sensation exhibition. He has been living in Britain for sixteen years and  began his career  as a puppet maker. He is currently producing  figurative sculpture in a hyper-realist style.
Calders suspended wire sculptures were given the name mobiles by Marcel Duchamp. Several abstract shapes, normally in a palette of primary colours, black and white, are attached to wires in a way reminiscent of the growth of branches on trees. For the writer Jean-Paul Sartre, Calders sculptures were at once lyrical inventions, technical, almost mathematical combinations, and the perceptible symbol of Nature: great elusive Nature, squandering pollen and abruptly causing a thousand butterflies to take wing.
This late painting shows the Archangel Michael appearing on the Day of Judgement with his flaming sword. In the foreground are Old Testament scenes of murder and betrayal: Adam and Eve weeps over the body of Abel (left), and Judith stands over the headless body of Holofernes (right).
This is a stylised portrait of Margit Pogany, a  Hungarian art student Brancusi met in Paris in  1910. He made a marble head of her from memory,  then invited her to his studio. He was delighted  when she recognised it. This is one of several  bronzes based on the marble. Photographs show that  Miss Pogany had a round face with large eyes and  strong eyebrows, and wore her hair in a smooth  chignon. Brancusi has refined her features down to  the very purest form. The abstract curves of this  piece, and of the other 'Danades', can be seen as  anticipating by some years, aspects of the  classicising Art Deco style of the 1920s.
Henry Moore's subject is the aged body. He made these drawings of his own hands when he was eighty-one and suffering from ill-health. 'Hands can convey so much' he said, 'they can beg or refuse, take or give, be open or clenched, show content or anxiety. They can be young or old, beautiful or deformed'.
Since 1967 Long has produced sculptures using natural materials which he collects during his long cross-country walks. Sometimes they are assembled in the same rural sites in which he finds the materials, sometimes he brings them inside the gallery spaces. Long has described the subject of his work as a balance between patterns of nature and the formalism of human abstract ideas, like lines and circles. It is where my human characteristics meet the natural forces and patterns of the world.
Ernst was a key figure in the anarchic circles of Cologne Dada before moving to Paris and the emerging Surrealist movement. This strange work dates from that moment of transition. The use of rough cork is typical of Ernsts inventive exploration of materials. By making the walls of the Dada city from this unexpected substance, he may offer a wry reflection on Dadas temporary, but resilient, nature.
Ink Splash II resembles an abstract painting. However the illusion of swift, gestural brushstrokes and splashes has been created through a painstaking process of weaving flattened bottle tops together with copper wire. The artist explains, the most important thing is the transformation. The fact that these media, each identifying a brand of drink, are no longer going back to serve the same role but are elements that could generate some reflection, some thinking, or just some wonder[T]hey are removed from their accustomed, functional context into a new one, and they bring along their histories and identities.
Richard Smith began his career making gestural abstract paintings inspired by the work of American artists such as Willem de Kooning. Following a visit to New York in the early 1960s, he found a new source of imagery in the packaging and advertising of cigarettes. In works such as this, the rectangular projecting form derives from the shape of the packet and the repeated circular motifs from the cigarettes tightly arrayed inside. In this way Smith established a form of abstract art that referred to sources in popular culture and the visual languages of the modern world.
Nicholsons interest in the ability of a work of art to create space led him to make reliefs and a small number of sculptures. This piece was made from a block of mahogany that Nicholson sawed, planed, sanded and painted white. The way it projects out into the space around it recalls the modernist architecture of the period. In a letter to his estranged wife Winifred, Nicholson wrote: Cutting wood is easy & the free movement & quickness of the whole thing is refreshing after the tremendous & meticulous concentration of the new ptg.
In 1934 Barbara Hepworth's abstraction 

based on the human figure gave way to an art of pure form. With such works as Three Forms she reduced her sculpture 

to the most simple shapes and eradicated almost all colour. She said later that she was 'absorbed in the relationships in space, in size and texture and weight, 

as well as the tensions between forms'. While the three elements are slightly imperfect in shape, their sizes and the spaces between them are precisely proportional to each other. This reflects her concern with the craft of hand-carving and with harmonious arrangement 

of form.
Clausen painted this picture at the village of Cookham Dean in Berkshire, where he lived. Mary Baldwin modelled for the woman at the gate. She was from the village and worked as the Clausen familys nanny. Clausen was one of the rural naturalists, a young generation of predominantly French-trained painters who painted realistic scenes of everyday country life, in the late 19th century. Like others in this group Clausen was greatly influenced by the French painter Jules Bastien-Lepage, who painted in a similar style.
From 1909 to 1911 Kirchner and other members of the Brcke group spent part of each summer at the Moritzburg Lakes near Dresden. Their relaxed, communal lifestyle and nude bathing reflected a cult of nature that was growing in Germany at the time. The exaggerated colours in this painting, contrasting yellow-orange flesh with blue water, emphasise the nudity of the figures. The original effect, however, may have been too extreme, as Kirchner repainted parts of the picture in 1926, making the colours lighter and the surface of the painting more even.
Gallery label, February 2004
Inspired by a furniture advertisement on  a billboard outside Rome, Lichtenstein made  a series of large ?interior? paintings between 1991 and 1993. He has transferred the dimensions of the billboard and a visual style reminiscent of advertising into a fine art context. The combination is highly unsettling, simultaneously encouraging and undermining recognition in the viewer. The scale creates  an unreal space that situates us both within and outside the picture, as if it were a room  that could be entered.
During the Somme in 1917 Orpen, an official war artist, described in a letter the horror of corpses lying unburied among the flooded shell holes in a landscape totally empty of life. In his pictures of the blasted battlefields and portraits
Magritte exchanges the heads of a mother and a baby  compressing one and enlarging the other. The effect is at once uncanny, threatening, comic and perceptive. The shrunken mature woman and imposing child may unsettle the viewer but are intimately bonded with each other. Their inverted relationship seems to stand for the cycle of generations. The original title, Maternity, may have referred too literally to such themes before Magritte provided the current, more enigmatic, replacement.
Delaunay painted a large number of works centred on the image of the Eiffel Tower as the symbol of modern Paris. The rising form of the tower can just be made out amidst the planes of colour. He took his inspiration from a photographic postcard showing a view of the tower looking over the rooftops of the city. The buildings are framed by the suggestion of an open window. Delaunays pure bright colours evoke intense light and suggest the dynamic interaction experienced in the city.
Gallery label, July 2008
Missionary Position II explores ideas about British society in the 1980s, especially conflicting opinions about religious beliefs across different generations and cultures. The artist uses herself as the model for both figures and the work reflects her growing antipathy towards her Christian upbringing. The praying figure suggests passive acceptance of white culture. The figure on the right, wearing a red turban, which Boyce associated with Rastafarianism, proposes an alternative position to the dominant ideologies of the day.
Gallery label, September 2004
This is the abandoned first version of one of Rossettis most important pictures, The Blessed Damozel (18758). He first treated the subject in a poem which, inspired by Dantes love for Beatrice, describes a dead womans yearning for her still-living lover. In the completed painting, Rossetti shows the Damozel looking down on her beloved from Heaven; this is the scene shown here. Rossettis fascination with the separation imposed by death proved eerily prophetic when his wife Elizabeth Siddall died of an overdose of laudanum in 1862.
Although this is an abstract painting, the thick vertical lines that dominate its centre can be seen as trees, with thick knotted roots at their base. It was probably this that led Krasner to call the painting Gothic Landscape, several years after completing it. Krasner was married to the artist Jackson Pollock and, during their life together, her work was eclipsed by his rise to fame. Gothic Landscape was made in the years following his death from a car crash in 1956. It belongs to a series of large canvases whose violent and expressive gestural brushstrokes reflected her feelings of grief.
This is one of a series of self-portraits that Warhol made in 196667, all based on the same photograph. His likeness remains recognisable but the image is painted in such a way as to minimise Warhols human qualities. His facial features, although always identifiable, also act as patterns of densely layered colour. Any expressive paint handling is suppressed by the silkscreened surface, reflecting Warhols self-proclaimed intention to completely remove all the hand gesture from art and become noncommittal, anonymous.
This is one of a group of paintings on paper which  Rothko made after a period of illness in 1968,  when he was too weak to work on his customary  large-scale canvases. Despite his poor health, he  apparently painted these works with great energy,  moving his whole body, not just his wrist. His  sweeping brushstrokes are clearly visible in the  two rectangles of colour which make up this  painting. It has been said that Rothko placed the  darker colour at the top of the painting in order  to prevent it being read as landscape, a reference  which he wished to avoid. The white border, which  was left by the tape Rothko used to fix the paper  to a board when painting, was for him an integral  part of the work.
'Linear Construction No.2' exists in over twenty versions, both standing and hanging. The light-catching nylon filament is wound around two intersecting plastic planes. The stringing gives a delicate sense of three dimensions in the complicated patterns created by the irregular lobe shapes of the transparent plastic. It was developed from Gabo's unrealised project for the lobby of the Esso Building in New York in the late 1940s. Two sculptures similar to 'Linear Construction No.2' were designed to be located on top of the two revolving lobby doors, turning slowly. It was one of Gabo's favourite works and was presented to the Tate in memory of the art historian Herbert Read.
Gallery label, February 2004
In the summer of 1891 Monet learned that a row of poplars on the river Epte, near to his home at Giverny, were to be felled. Monet paid for them to be left standing long enough for him to paint them. In all he executed twenty-three paintings of this scene, and exhibited a group of them together in 1892. Eleven of these show this same view at different times of day and in different weather conditions. A particularly marked feature of this work is its combination of a strong surface pattern, emphasised by vigorous brushwork, and the suggestion of pictorial depth conveyed by the continuous zig-zag of trees leading back into the distance.
Agar saw reproduction, or womb magic, as an important component of the feminine imagination. In this work she evoked the development of an embryo. Each of the four sections mixes symbols of life and death, and images of marine plants and animals. Examples of so-called primitive and ancient arts allude to the beginning of culture. As these elements are embedded within the dense layers of the painting, they seem to suggest memories of collective experience that the embryo carries into the world.
This is one of a series of portraits Sargent was commissioned to make of the family of the art dealer Asher Wertheimer (18441918). Sargent befriended the family and Wertheimer helped Sargent obtain commissions. This portrait shows Wertheimers eldest daughters, Helena (Ena) and Elizabeth (Betty). Sargent was attracted by the charm of the Wertheimer family, especially the vivacity of Ena (right), something which is clearly revealed in this portrait. The different textures of the sisters dresses are skilfully evoked, the rich depth of Bettys red velvet contrasting with the shine of Enas white damask.
Gallery label, September 2004
This is one of a series made by Sutherland in preparation for a larger version commissioned for a church in Northampton. The sources on which he drew indicate the way he saw the theme in terms of past paintings, the  

individual and recent historical events. His primary reference point was Matthias Grunewalds famous     Issenhiem altarpiece (illustrated to the left), in which Christ is shown anguished and blistered; Sutherland drew himself slung from the ceiling. He also referred to recently released photographs of dead and starving Concentration Camp victims.
Schads models unerringly return our gaze. Their convincing presence reflects the artists association with the New Objectivity, an artistic movement that combined social criticism with a near-photographic realism. The black woman and the pigeon-chested man were accustomed to scrutiny, earning their living as sideshow acts in Berlin funfairs. Unusually this unsettling portrayal of the objectification of the body, voyeurism and social alienation is focussed on the male as well as the female nude.
Nash collected unusual, mostly natural, objects whose appearance conjured up strange associations. This collage is made from his own photographs of such found objects. Both collage and found objects were often used by the Surrealists. They liked the juxtaposition of disparate elements in collage, and the element of chance inherent in found objects. The Victorian seaside town of Swanage 

was one of Nashs favourite places. He said its combination of beauty, ugliness and the power to disquiet held a strange fascination that was a form of natural surrealism.
Everything is in a state of change in this still-life scene. Some roses and a rampant insect form have become half-animal and half-metallic. A rose  or a phantom rose?  appears to grow through the white tablecloth. Others begin to push through the wall, now a treacherously thin and insubstantial membrane. Tannings paintings suggest hidden and indescribable forces at work in our daily world, challenging our beliefs and expectations.
Dine believes that tools provide a 'link with our past, the human past, the hand'. They feature in many of his works, and can be seen as a symbol of artistic creation. There is also an autobiographical resonance, as Dine's family owned a hardware store in Cincinnati. In these prints, the tools are presented as a series of discrete items, as if laid out for analysis and classification.
In the 1950s, Duchamp made a small number of moulded objects, based on male and female genitalia. They exemplify his fascination with sexual ambiguity. In this sculpture, the metal wedge and the pink plastic slit-form can be seen as expressing male-female, inside-outside dualities in union. Duchamp made the original version in 1954 as a wedding present for his second wife. It is reported that the couple kept it displayed on a bedside table and travelled with it, like a wedding ring.
For six months Sarah Lucas and fellow artist Tracey Emin rented a retail

space in east London where they made artworks, ranging from printed mugs 

to T-shirts with slogans, and put them on sale. This work commemorates 

the closing down of  `The Shop`. The cardboard badges are typical of the 

simple, handmade objects they offered.
Arp felt that he could incorporate chance within artistic production, comparing the role of the artist to a plant bearing fruit. According to the Laws of Chance shows Arp playing with random composition, in this case dropping painted pieces of paper onto a surface. Torn Woodcut was made in a similar way in 1954, using the pieces of a Dada print he had made in 1920.
Nicholson was interested in the ways in which paintings can represent space. In the 1930s, he made shallow reliefs in which areas of different depths define actual space. In the most radical of these, colour was reduced to just white or grey to achieve a sense of purity. Depth and plain colour make the play of light and shadow an intrinsic part of the work. This emphasis was related to new ideas about living and, especially, to modern architecture, in which natural light and formal simplicity were major concerns.
Nauman has explained that these Studies for Holograms grew out of his performance works: 'The idea of making faces had to do with thinking about the body as something you can manipulate. I had done some performance pieces - rigorous works dealing with standing, leaning, bending - and as they were performed, some of them seemed to carry a large emotional impact. I was very interested in that: if you perform a bunch of arbitrary operations, some people will make very strong connections with them and others won't.'
In the early 1950s, Burri made a number of works using sacking. Some included the original printing found on the sacks, acknowledging their origins as part of the relief effort for post-war Europe. The addition of red paint, reminiscent of blood, was seen as a link to the artists early training as a doctor. However, Burri dismissed these sombre interpretations, insisting that he strove for an art that was independent of references. He described his painting as a freedom attained, constantly consolidated, vigilantly guarded.
In the early 1950s, Rotella began to rip posters away from the walls of outdoor hoardings in Rome, and used them to create elaborate collages. Many of these were film posters but he also used advertisements for appliances and other goods, so that his works became a commentary on the post-war consumer boom. In the studio he would mount the poster fragments onto canvas, rearranging the pieces into new compositions but also stripping away further layers to accentuate their distressed appearance.
Gallery label, August 2004
The dining table was one of Bonnards favourite subjects. Its associations with domestic routine and conviviality were in tune with his intimate vision of art. Here, the artists wife Marthe sips coffee, with her pet dog at her side. The table stretches invitingly before us, so that the painting appears to record the casual glance of someone about to sit down opposite Marthe. As can be seen in the preparatory sketches shown alongside the painting here, Bonnards composition was carefully planned and developed.
The furious movement of the two principal figures is placed within a claustrophobic setting, watched over by the portrait, which gives this work a striking intensity. It is usually seen as an image of tragic suffering. One - and possibly both - of the twisting human figures have been identified as George Dyer, the artists lover, who committed suicide in 1971. The bird-like form in the foreground, with its snarling human mouth, has been linked to the Furies, the fearsome agents of divine judgement in Greek mythology.
Gallery label, September 2004
This portrait shows the famous Italian dancer Giovanna Zanerini, known on the stage as Baccelli, at the height of her career. Her elaborate costume seems to be adapted from the ballet Les Amants Surpris in which she had recently taken London by storm. Baccelli was the mistress of John Sackville, 3rd Duke of Dorset who commissioned the painting. The rapid brushwork, translucent paint and shimmering light effects are typical of Gainsboroughs style at this time. When the portrait was first exhibited, it was chiefly praised as an excellent likeness; as the Original, light airy and elegant.
This is Spencer's final self-portrait and one of his last paintings. In December 1958 he discovered that he was suffering from cancer and underwent an operation. Unfortunately the malignancy was not excised and Spencer died on 14 December 1959. Five months before his death he stayed with friends in Yorkshire where he painted this portrait. Although seriously ill he finished the picture in five days, in the drawing room of the house, using a bedroom mirror. The work is remarkable for the unflinching scrutiny of the artist's gaze, and its use of extreme close-up to convey a sense of physical and psychological intensity.
Chagall had just married his first wife Bella when he began this painting. It is a reverie in which he imagines himself outstretched in the Russian countryside where they spent their honeymoon. He remembered it as a place of 'wood, fir-trees, solitude. The moon behind the forest. The pig in the sty, the horse behind the window, in the fields. The sky lilac.' Though an idyllic scene, the figure seems oddly isolated. This may relate to the fact that Chagall painted it during the First World War, a conflict then being fought on Russian soil.
A clarinet lies on a mantelpiece at the centre of this playful work. In front of it stands a bottle with the characters RHU, the first three letters of the French word for rum. The word Valse (Waltz) introduces the idea of dancing, reinforcing the theme of music evoked by the clarinet and suggestions of treble and bass clefs. The scrolled form in the lower right-hand corner could stand for either the bracket of the mantelpiece or the head of an instrument.
This is as close to Pop Art as I ever came, Hockney later said, but I didnt use it because I was interested in the design of the packet or anything, it was just that it was a very common design. Made while Hockney was still a student at the Royal College of Art, its very English subject might be seen as an ironic comment on the prevalent fascination with American imports. His specially constructed illusionistic canvas was intended to allow him to ignore the concept of illusionistic space and paint merrily in a flat style.
In 1997 Jones began three large series  of photographs entitled The Dining Room, The Sitting Room and The Garden. As  the titles suggest, each series features a quintessentially English domestic setting. Jones worked with three teenage girls, near neighbours and close friends, photographing them repeatedly in  closely related compositions that  highlight the restless tension which,  for many, characterises the experience  of adolescence. Although the sitters frequently appear together, they rarely seem to interact, either with each  other or their surroundings. Jones's compositions are carefully constructed using formal devices traditionally associated with painting, such as reflections and an underlying symmetry.
Bacon used a variety of strategies  to represent what one commentator described as 'the anguish of contemporary life'. Here we see his  use of animals to evoke aggression, vulnerability or both. The image  of the dog derived from Eadward Muybridge's time-lapse photographs  of animals in motion. Bacon smeared  the paint to suggest what seems to be demented movement. In contrast the setting, depicted with an economy of means, was based on the sea front in Monte Carlo, where he had lived from 1946 to 1950.
This is one of three paintings by De Kooning titled Women Singing. They were based on pop singers the artist saw on television. The energetic style and vibrant colours are typical of De Kooning''s work of the 1960s. Interviewed by Sylvester a few years earlier, he spoke of the authority that he felt he had achieved in his painting. ''I have all my forces ... I have a bigger feeling now of freedom. I am more convinced ... of picking up the paint and the brush and drumming it out.''
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
Carrington was part of a brilliant generation of graduates from the Slade School of Art, including Mark Gertler and David Bomberg. She was associated with the Bloomsbury Group and shared their unorthodox social attitudes. This painting is of a farm near Keswick in the Lake District where the newly-wed Carrington spent a summer holiday with her husband and their friends, including Gerald Brenan, with whom she developed a mutual attraction. It has been suggested that the two female figures, dwarfed by a fertile and undulating landscape, relate to the artists sense of being overwhelmed by her own womanhood.
Ruff believes that photography can only capture the surface of things, conveying what he describes as the authenticity of a manipulated and prearranged reality. In 1981, he began a series of colour portraits of his friends and fellow students at the Dsseldorf Academy. Each subject is framed like a passport photo against a plain background. The portraits resolutely refuse to provide any psychological insights into the sitters.
Gallery label, September 2004
De Kooning's boldly expressive style, with its thick gestural brushstrokes, meant that he was often categorised as an Abstract Expressionist. However his paintings often include recognisable figures, even if they are barely discernable. The central figure in The Visit is a woman with her legs spread out. In the right-hand corner is a shape that could be either the woman's outstretched hand, or a face in profile looking over her. The title was suggested by one of De Kooning's assistants, who thought that the composition resembled a medieval painting of the Annunciation.
Hogarths unfinished oil sketch is an illustration to John Miltons epic poem, Paradise Lost. Satan, on the left, confronts Death who bars his way from hell to earth. Between them is Sin, shown as a naked woman. She reveals to Satan that she is his daughter, and that Death is their incestuous child. This is one of the earliest paintings devoted to a subject from Milton and predates Burke's seminal Enquiry into ... the sublime
Made in Paris on 17 May 1952, Woman at the Window is a portrait of Picassos lover Franoise Gilot in profile. It is the second of two versions of the print. From the first to the second, the image was somewhat refined and the grey and black tones were made deeper and richer. Franoise's forehead was made a little less pronounced while her hair was rendered more geometric and defined. Finally, the shadow behind her changed shape, becoming darker and more solid.
Henry Moore's subject is the aged body. He made these drawings of his own hands when he was eighty-one and suffering from ill-health. 'Hands can convey so much' he said, 'they can beg or refuse, take or give, be open or clenched, show content or anxiety. They can be young or old, beautiful or deformed'.
Whiteread's sculptures are casts of carefully chosen objects, most of which bear the traces of human use. She most often casts the 'negative' spaces around these objects, which then become the 'positive' form of the sculpture. Often the objects recall poignant events; her recent group of bed casts can be associated with sleep, illness and dying. This work adds another dimension to the group of bed casts, with its combination of solid sculptural form and associations of air-filled fragility. Here, the mould containing the air mattress during the casting process has become part of the work, enclosing the Lilo within its box-like shape.
Pasmore believed that art derived from nature, and specifically from its underlying processes and structures rather than its surface appearance. In his reliefs Pasmore brought ideas of growth and abstract harmony into three dimensions. He had rejected tilted elements in the relief because they were not organic developments of the rectangles in the way that horizontals and verticals are. Geometry, though subject to the je ne sais quoi of personal judgement, is a guide to the organic process.
Egley conveys the claustrophobia of the inside of an omnibus (a horse-drawn carriage which travelled along a fixed route). All levels of society, from the old country woman with her piles of baggage to the city clerk with his cane, were forced to share a small compartment.Egley painted the carriage in a coachbuilders yard and posed models in a makeshift carriage made from boxes and planks in his back garden in Paddington. The Illustrated London News said the stern and trying incidents would be recognized by thousands of weary wayfarers through the streets of London.
This was the last in the sequence of one hundred prints known as the Vollard Suite. Incorporating a range of techniques, the series often drew upon mythological themes as well as allusions to Picassos relationship to Marie-Thrse Walter. This print is directly based on Rembrandts engraving Jupiter and Antiope (1659), in which Jupiter visits Antiope, the daughter of the King of Thebes, in the guise of a satyr or faun. Made as Picassos relationship with Marie-Thrse was petering out, it shows the faun gently uncovering the sleeping Antiope without disturbing her.
The story of Psyche comes from a tale by the Roman poet Lucius Apuleius. Psyche was the daughter of a king. Cupid, Venuss son, fell in love with her, but she angered him, and he left her. Psyche wandered over the earth in search of Cupid until Jupiter took pity on her, made her immortal, and re-united the lovers. Leighton based Psyches pose on an ancient statue of Venus Leaving the Bath that hed seen in Naples in 1859. He may also have designed the frame, which echoes the architectural details in the background of the picture.
Lger often painted works showing two women together. This theme of a pair of figures had precedents in classical art, and allowed the artist to explore the rhyming shapes and patterns created by the symmetrical image. Here two women are seen with their limbs intertwined, in a state of physical ease and relaxation. One holds a flower, a symbol of natural beauty and fertility. However, this is no rustic idyll. The figures are drawn as outlines upon an abstract background of seemingly casually arranged rectangles of bright colours, giving the painting a typically modern sense of energy and dynamism.
Like Head of a Boxer of the same year, Head of a Young Girl was made while Laurens was under contract to Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler. The works may have been given as gifts by Daniel-Henry to Gustav and Elly. The angular structure of the womans face contrasts with the soft waves of her hair and the gentle curve of her left shoulder, illustrating the beginning of Laurens move away from the more abstract geometric forms of Cubism towards a more organic style.
Warhol's 1985 series of screenprints <i>Reigning Queens</i> included colour portraits of Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, Margrethe II of Denmark, Beatrix of the Netherlands and Ntombi Twala of Swaziland. The images of Elizabeth II were based on a photograph taken for her Silver Jubilee in 1977. Warhol presents the Queen as an iconic and overtly glamorous figure. His own lines, added to the photographic image, suggest the stylised make-up of a Hollywood star, associating the portrait with the cult of celebrity that was prevalent in the 1980s.
At a time when many artists were abandoning traditional sculptural techniques, Penone began to use perhaps the most ancient method  carving. He took industrially sawn units of timber and, using chisels, followed the knots in the planks to remove rings of wood and expose the shape of a tree. His work looks at the relationship of industry and nature, suggesting that a sensitive approach to materials is still possible in an industrialised world. Penones first trees were made in 1969 and this work dates from 1980.
The title of Hip, Hip, Hoorah! was intended to celebrate the artistic freedom achieved by the CoBrA movement (19481951), a group of artists active in Copenhagen, Brussels and Amsterdam who sought to reinvigorate post-war culture. The figures combine human attributes with animal or bird-like features. Appel thought of them as people of the night, and so gave them a dark background. The bright colours and child-like imagery are typical of CoBrA. Appel often took inspiration from childrens drawings, believing that the child in man is all thats strongest, most receptive, most open and unpredictable.
Gallery label, September 2004
At the time of making, lead was an infrequently used material in Moores oeuvre. This is one of a series of sculptures that Moore himself cast in lead in 193840. The material allowed thinner, more sinuous forms to be wrought. Moore said that he also liked working with lead because something about its appearance announced the materials poisonous quality; it was sinister.
Kennington was one of the founder members of the  New English Art Club in 1886, and its first  Secretary. He was well known for his compelling  pictures of the urban poor, although he also  painted less emotive scenes from everyday life,  and portraits. The rich colouring, smooth handling  of paint, and subject were probably inspired by  the work of the seventeenth-century Spanish  artist Murillo, who also painted poor children.
In 1966 a British Council grant enabled Bernd and Hilla Becher to travel to the UK and undertake their first significant project in Britain. During this trip they photographed all the major industrial areas, receiving assistance from the National Coal Board. Winding towers stand above mine shafts to hoist coal (and people) to the surface. The period over which this work was made saw the decimation of the coal industry in the UK; what had been working machines at the beginning of the project were relics by the time it was completed.
$he explores the imagery of consumerism and female identity, bringing together advertisements for household appliances alongside fragmentary images of a model taken from Esquire magazine. Sex is everywhere, symbolised in the glamour of mass-produced luxury  the interplay of fleshy plastic and smooth, fleshier metal, Hamilton wrote. This relationship of woman and appliance is a fundamental theme of our culture; as obsessive and archetypal as the Western movie gun duel. The mechanisation of desire is alsoa key concern of the Large Glass, whose notes Hamilton was translating at this time.
The English poet John Milton, who died in 1674, was viewed by Blake as England's greatest poet, worthy of emulation but  by no means above criticism. It was inevitable that in the large colour prints, his most important printing project, Blake would include Miltonic subjects.This print illustrates lines from Book XI of Milton's poem Paradise Lost. The Archangel Michael shows Adam the misery that  will be inflicted on Man now he has eaten the Forbidden Fruit. In a vision of 'Death's 'grim Cave' Adam sees a 'monstrous crew' of men afflicted by 'Diseases dire'.
The coffee grinders handle is shown in multiple positions while, stripped of its outer casing, the mechanism produces the flow of coffee. This diagrammatic approach, reminiscent of a technical manual, reflects Duchamps fascination with machinery as well as his concern for representing the passage of time. Coffee Mill was made as a gift for Duchamps brother, the sculptor Raymond Duchamp-Villon, to be displayed in his kitchen.
This Lake District scene was shown at the Royal Academy in 1798 along with several other North of England subjects, following Turners first tour of the region the previous year. It is based on a sketchbook study (Tate) worked up in watercolour to show the stormy conditions he presumably witnessed, writing Black on the surface of the lake. This was his cue for the mood of this dramatic painting, enlivened by the rainbow which would become a frequent motif. Turner is making a consciously Sublime statement, intended to evoke the viewers awe at the grandeur of Nature.
Husband and wife team Bernd and Hilla Becher began photographing old industrial sites in the 1950s, and described their subjects as buildings where anonymity is accepted to be the style. The coal bunkers in these photographs were located in Germany, France and Britain, while the photographs of pitheads were all taken at British collieries between 1965 and 1973. Within a few years of completing this work, almost all of the structures had been demolished.
These collages are mainly made from magazines given to Paolozzi by American ex-servicemen. They show his fascination with popular culture and technology, as well as with the glamour of American consumerism. The title of the series refers to Henry Ford''s famous statement that ''History is more or less bunk.... We want to live in the present''. It reflects Paolozzi''s belief that his work should respond to contemporary culture.
The baroque castle of Seaton Delaval, Northumberland, was built by John Vanbrugh between 1718 and 1729 and destroyed by fire in 1822. Piper visited the castle in 1941. He had previously made records of major buildings in anticipation of their destruction through bombing or modernisation. He had also recorded bomb-damage, and found parallels between the ruined castle and these recent subjects. The image seems to be both a nostalgic lament for a lost time and a statement about the present. Piper described the castles colouring as ochre and flame licked red, pock-marked and stained... incredibly up-to-date: very much of our times.
Peter Davies' text and abstract paintings refer  back to the history and the techniques of painting. His vivid schemes revive an interest in the optical effects of colour and ordered pattern. They recall Op art of the 1970s, but also reproduce the  mesmerising effects of computer-generated designs or television test cards. Small Touching Squares Painting is an example of the somewhat obsessive nature of his painting. However his  work also retains a visibly hand-made quality. Since graduating in 1996 from Goldsmiths College, he has exhibited in the 1997 Sensation exhibition  at the Royal Academy and gained increasing prominence as part of an emerging generation  of British artists.
Gallery label, December 2004
A number of portraits from the 1560s seem to be by the painter of this work, whose identity is unknown. Characteristic features include the angle at which the face is presented and the soft treatment of the hair. The sitter may be Elizabeth Is maid of honour, Helena Snakenborg, who became a powerful figure at court. In 1565 she had visited England with the Swedish princess Cecilia, remaining there as the fiance of the elderly Marquis of Northampton, whom she was to marry in 1571. The carnation behind her ear may be a symbol of her betrothal.
Logsdail painted this picture from a vehicle stationed for weeks at the kerb-side in Trafalgar Square, his feet covered with straw to protect them from the cold. It is the most famous of his series of London scenes. The view highlights the plight of child street sellers, and would also have reminded contemporary audiences of the Bloody Sunday riots which had taken place in Trafalgar Square a few months before. During the demonstration thousands of people, demanding the right to free speech, were brutally attacked by armed police and troops.
Sheets of inked and stained pages have been stacked together and densely layered, sometimes twenty sheets deep, the edges and surface cut with a knife to reveal colour striation beneath. The undersea landscape is related to Gallaghers imaginative exploration of the Middle Passage, the most treacherous part of the slave trading route between Africa and North America. The central figure is a black sailor or pirate with a peg leg. I think of this painting as an origin myth of sorts, with a kind of evil doctor, perhaps related to Doctor Moreau or Frankenstein, at its centre, Gallagher has said.
Gallery label, August 2004
Brancusi attempted to capture the essential qualities of a human face or an animal in abstract and elementary forms. Here a bronze 'fish' stands on a polished disc, (its 'pool'), above a carved wooden base. Brancusi explained: 'When you see a fish, you do not think of its scales, do you? You think of its speed, its floating, flashing body seen through water ... If I made fins and eyes and scales, I would arrest its movement and hold you by a pattern, or a shape of reality. I want just the flash of its spirit.'
With its unexpected juxtapositions and shifts in scale, and its precise tempera technique, 
The Beached Margin is typical of Wadsworths still lifes. Although never a Surrealist, his paintings incorporated disconcerting imagery that related to the work of de Chirico. Widely travelled, Wadsworth was better informed than most British artists about developments in the Continental art world. In the early 1930s he joined Unit One, a group of artists and architects who were determined to bring Modernism into British culture.
Venice was surely built to be painted by ... Turner, wrote the critic of the Art Union when he first saw this work in 1842. Unlike his paintings of Rome, Turners impression of the city was not dominated by ancient ruins and the historical past. Instead he explored Venices unique combination of water, light and grand Renaissance architecture, all of which seem to blend together. Here he is transfixed by the spectacle of the churches of Santa Maria della Salute and Santa Maria della Presentazione, known as the Zitelle (or Citella), reflected in the waters of the Guidecca Canal.
In the 1950s, Duchamp made a small number of moulded objects, based on the

bodys sexual parts. They exemplify his fascination with sexual

ambiguity. Female Fig Leaf was probably based on a mould of

the sexual parts of the female mannequin in Duchamp's installation Etant Donns(Given). The prudish title, Female Fig Leaf, is deliberately ironic. despite its phallic appearance

and the fact that the French word dard is slang for penis, could

also derive from the cast of a vagina. It therefore embodies inside-outside,

male-female dualities. Wedge of Chastity is the smallest of the three. The

metal wedge and the slit-form can also be seen as expressing the

union of male and female shapes. Duchamp made the original version of the

sculpture in 1954 as a wedding present for his second wife. It is reported that

the couple kept it displayed on a bedside table and travelled with it,

like a wedding ring.
Gallery label, September 2004
The biblical Book of Job addresses the existence of evil and suffering in a world where a loving, all-powerful God exists. It has been described as the most profound and literary work of the entire Old Testament. 

In Job, God and Satan discuss the limits of human faith and endurance. God lets Satan force Job to undergo extreme trials and tribulations, including the destruction of his family. Despite this, as God predicted, Jobs faith remains unshaken and he is rewarded by God with the restoration of his health, wealth and family. Here Blake shows Satan torturing Job with boils.

From The Holy Bible (King James version), Book of Job, Chapter II, 3-10

3.	And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.4.	And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life.5.	But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.6.	And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life.7.	So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.8.	And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes.9.	Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die.10.	But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.
Although possibly incomplete, the subject can be identified as Death, the last of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse who announce the Day of Judgement (Book of Revelation). The choice may have been in response to the death of Turners father in 1829, suggested by the unusual treatment which is both tender and menacing. Death appears, not as a triumphant, upright figure astride his horse, but as a phantom emerging from a turbulent mist: his skeletal form, arms outstretched, and draped submissively over the horses pale back. Such disturbing visions were considered to embody the very concept of the Sublime.
Paik was fascinated by the figure of the robot, and created his first radio-controlled robot in 1964. This later work is a sculptural figure constructed using nine vintage Bakelite radios, which the artist acquired from thrift stores and markets. Bakelite was an early heat-resistant plastic that was commonly used for domestic electrical goods and childrens toys in the 1930s and early 1940s. Paik has customised the radios to incorporate specially compiled video footage. Their archaic quality harks back to an era when global communications technology was just beginning to become part of everyday life.
Coloured stripes cross along a common band, reminiscent of twisting ribbons, to create a wave pattern. The choice of colours was intended to provoke an optical mix in the eye, with as much interaction as possible between colours. Light blue and yellow ochre form the basic pair of colours into which occasional threads of rose and violet are introduced to accentuate the warm and cold accents across the canvas. The title refers to William Shakespeares sonnet Shall I compare thee to a summers day?
Gill wanted to return to direct carving of stone and worked on this relief over a period of seven months. He was influenced by the graceful, simplified forms of carved, medieval religious sculptures in Europe and India. Some Indian temple sculpture showed embracing couples and British artists such as Gill became more informed about such sculpture through the India Society, founded in 1910. Gill did not exhibit this work, selling it in 1912 to Edward Warren, who already owned a version of Rodins The Kiss.
Unfinished works, such as this, provide an opportunity to scrutinise Turner's techniques closely. Though the process has been interrupted, these pictures reveal much about how he built up his images.
Graham Robertson was an author, painter and collector who bequeathed to the Tate Gallery more than twenty paintings and drawings. He was twenty-eight when he posed for this portrait together with his eleven-year-old poodle, Mouton. John Singer Sargent presents Robertson as a London dandy, wearing a fur-collared full-length coat and leaning on a jade-handled cane. In his autobiography Robertson recalled that Sargent had insisted he wear the long coat even though it was summer. He also tried to make Robertson look as thin and youthful as possible.
The explicit realism of this image is unusual in artistic images of the naked human form. Spencer shows his own and his wifes bodies in a frank, non-idealised manner, paying close attention to the colour and texture of skin. This way of painting actual bodies may relate to his idiosyncratic Christian belief that God resides in everything and everybody. The sexual tension of the scene has been interpreted as reflecting the fact that Spencers second marriage was never consummated  a situation represented symbolically by the uncooked meat.
This work shows Adam and Eve discovering their dead son.  His brother Cain, the murderer, flees the scene. Despite his evil deed, Cain, appears as an ideal male figure. Here, Blakes approach is in line with that of Lavater, who argued that someones appearance is often better than his actions. However Lavater also suggested that in performing an evil act the person could become disfigured, perhaps explaining Cains contorted body. 

Rather than follow Lavater here, Blakes use of the body to invoke self-loathing, fear and, in the case of Eve, despair may be closer to pathognomy - a way of reading emotions about which Lavater remained sceptical.
The dramatic theme of a lion attacking a horse preoccupied Stubbs for over thirty years. This painting comes from a series of four episodes in a terrifying attack on a passive horse. This is the first stage, as the horse scents the lion emerging from its cave and rises up in fright. The setting for this violent encounter is the harsh, rocky landscape of Creswell Crags in the Peak District. The area was then an inaccessible, wild region that fascinated Stubbs. The scenery makes a suitably romantic background for the sublime drama of the scene.
This work represents the climax of Carnival, a season of fancy dress parties, masked balls and street processions with wild music and dancing. The two figures are based on close friends of the artist, who is possibly represented by the masked clown. Beckmanns work, with its grotesque and distorted figures, epitomised what the Nazis considered to be degenerate art. He was dismissed from his teaching post in Frankfurt in 1933. Several of his works were included in the 1937 Degenerate Art show, prompting him to leave Germany for Amsterdam.
Van Dyck depicts Lady Killigrew in a simplified form of dress that gave an air of timelessness, and was faster and simpler to paint than the richly textured lace that was the fashion. She is shown holding roses which symbolise love, particularly within marriage. Van Dyck was born and trained in Antwerp, a major art trade centre, but also spent years studying and working in Italy. Out of these diverse influences he evolved new forms of portraiture which were immensely popular with the court elite and had a major impact on later artists in Britain.
Bourgeois produced a large series of soft sculptures in her later years, making use of textiles and old clothing that she had kept for decades. This headless suspended figure made of stuffed fabric is posed in the arch of hysteria, a position expressing an extreme state of tension and pain documented by the nineteenth century French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot.
In 1933 Giacometti said that when making his sculptures he reproduced images that were complete in my minds eye... without stopping to ask myself what they might mean. This fragile construction suggests the mysteries of the unconscious, combining space and time, eroticism and death. The cage-like structure supports delicate organic forms. The upper shapes have been seen as skeletal or phallic, while the lower suspended form has been interpreted as a beating heart or a clocks pendulum.
This painting almost certainly represents the American Shakespearean actor Ira Frederick Aldridge (1807?67) in character. Around 18267 the same sitter appears in several paintings by British artists, including another picture by Simpson, The Captive Slave 1827 (Art Institute of Chicago) for which this appears to be a related study. Aldridge came to Britain in 1824, and embarked on what became a hugely successful career in Europe. It is unclear whether he was working as a professional model for these artists, or sitting to them to promote his own public image.
The Two Crowns of the title are the golden crown of a king and the crown of thorns worn by Christ on the cross. Dicksee invented this highly moral scene in which a medieval king, riding in a triumphal procession, is startled by the sight of a crucifix (or perhaps sees a vision of Christ) and is reminded of the transience of earthly power and success. In fact the chivalric, Christian knight had been a role model for the modern gentleman for most of the nineteenth century. This painting was bought for the nation from the Royal Academy in 1900 for 2,000.
During the 1970s, Beuys lectured extensively on art and politics, and the task of creating a genuinely democratic society. This series of three blackboards were used to illustrate an event held at Tate in 1972, in which Beuys discussed his ideas about communication and grassroots democracy. A fourth blackboard, not displayed here, was used during a subsequent lecture at the Whitechapel Gallery.
Holes was made from layers of pasted newspapers. The surface was painted white with hints of pale blue, then pierced to reveal the different layers underneath. Shimamoto began the series around 1949 or 1950, during the post-war American occupation of Japan. The contrast between delicacy and violence may reflect the fracturing of traditional Japanese culture in the wake of the Second World War. This balance between destructive and creative action was a key element in the work of the Gutai Art Association (195472), of which Shimamoto was a founder.
'You are aware that there is a transition, that something that is happening within you is gradually registering externally.' This is how Antony Gormley described his experience of making plaster casts of his own body. For Three Ways he used such casts to make lead figures in three simple poses: curled into a ball, bending over and lying down.
Head of a Young Boy is one of the earliest lithographs that Picasso made in collaboration with the Paris lithographer Fernand Mourlot. It has been interpreted as the artists nostalgic memory of himself as a young boy. The present print is the third and final state of the lithograph. In the passage from the first to the second state, the boys head was shaded more strongly and made more expressive. In this final version, the shading was softened and rendered more delicate.
This work was originally made by pouring polyurethane foam into the corner of a gallery. The bottom and two flat sides are effectively a cast of the floor and walls, while the slumps on the front result from the unpredictable behaviour of waves of slowly solidifying foam. It was cast in lead in 1975, giving the sculpture physical weight and presence. While many artists were interested in the literal properties of materials, Benglis wanted to suggest bodily and geological flows.
This was the first of many portraits by  Sutherland, mostly of either friends or  distinguished elderly people. He met Maugham, the  famous novelist and dramatist, at St Jean Cap  Ferrat, and was invited to paint his portrait.  Maugham was then aged seventy-five. The bamboo  stool and background colour, like that of the  robes of Buddhist monks, were intended to refer to  the setting of many of Maugham's novels and short  stories in the Far East. The portrait was painted  from drawings made by Sutherland during about ten  one hour sittings with Maugham.
Like his sculptures, Giacomettis portraits emerged from an intense scrutiny of his subjects, and a process of continually reworking the image in order to record his shifting visual impressions. Seated Man depicts his brother Diego, one of Giacomettis most frequent models, but even this familiar face became an object of investigation and discovery for the artist, who commented When he poses for me I dont recognise him.
Merz stapled strips of aluminium together to create this suspended sculpture, which originally hung in her home before being exhibited in a gallery. Like other artists 
of the Arte Povera group, Merz used inexpensive, ordinary materials to challenge the elite status of art. She is also concerned with domesticity and has used techniques with feminine associations, such as knitting. There has never been any division between my life and my work, she has said.
The mountain is Coniston Old Man, Cumbria, which Turner saw in 1797. This was the first picture that he elevated by quoting poetry in the Royal Academy catalogue. He chose lines from Milton's Paradise Lost, describing the 'mists and exhalations' of the atmosphere at sunrise. These shifting airs and lights, and flock of sheep running before them, give the landscape a natural drama and intensity. A reviewer in 1798 remarked This artist's works discover a strength of mind which is not [sic] often the concomitant of much longer experience: and their effect in oil or on paper is equally sublime.
In the summer of 1967, Morris began to purchase rectangular sheets of industrial felt and cut into them with a series of straight lines. When suspended, the strips of felt would tumble from their own weight. Morris wanted to question the fixed geometric shapes of minimalist sculpture. As he wrote in his essay Anti-Form, the alternative was to let materials determine their own shape. This meant relinquishing control of the final appearance: each time this work is displayed, its precise arrangement will change.
With its warped scale and unexpected combinations of images, Otati has a dream-like quality, perhaps reflecting Surrealist preoccupations with the subconscious and the freeing of the imagination. This ethereal quality is further heightened by the thinly-applied layers of paint and varnish, which produce a translucent effect. Otati is one of a group of paintings known as the Transparencies in which, Picabia noted, all my instincts may have free rein. The central female figure with full red lips and curving body may relate to images of glamorous pin-ups which Picabia later used as the basis for a series of kitsch nudes.
The Backs were Matisses largest sculptures. Over twenty years he progressively refined the original pose, based on a woman leaning on a fence, until he achieved a massive simplicity. Matisses decision to show the back view of a woman on such a monumental scale was unorthodox. By concealing her face, he avoided the complexities of visual engagement between artist and model. This helped him to consider the nude as an arrangement of forms that he could simplify and stylise.
The figure of Venus in this sculpture is based on the image of the goddess in a painting by Renoir, 'The Judgement of Paris'. In Greek myth Aphrodite (known to the Romans as Venus) competed for the prize of a golden apple, which she won by promising Paris that he could marry Helen of Troy, the most beautiful woman in the world. Renoir's sculpture shows Venus holding the apple in her moment of triumph. Renoir's conception of this work was influenced by memories of antique sculpture and by the 'modern classicism' of the contemporary sculptor Maillol. Severely crippled by arthritis, Renoir was helped in making this sculpture by an assistant, Richard Guino.
Thomas was related to Sir Henry Lee, Elizabeth I's Champion and creator of imagery for her annual Accession Day celebrations. Henry may have helped devise the complex symbolism of this portrait. Thomas served in the English colonial forces in Ireland. His bare legs are a fantasy evocation both of the dress of an Irish soldier, and that of a Roman hero. Thomas was suspected of treachery to Elizabeth and visited London in 1594 partly to refute this. The Latin inscription in the tree refers to the Roman Mucius Scaevola, who stayed true to Rome even when among its enemies. Lee implies that he too is faithful.
Kline began as a figurative painter, but by 1950 was making vigorous, large-scale abstract paintings in black and white. His sense of space and insistence on flatness were particularly influenced by Japanese art and many of his works have a calligraphic feel. The bold directional marks in this painting also have a strong architectural sense, and it has been suggested that the work relates to an engraving of a clock tower by the nineteenth-century French artist Charles Meryon. Despite the spontaneous feel of his work, Kline often made small preparatory sketches before executing the larger paintings.
Doll Clothes presents a photograph of the artist  Cindy Sherman  as a paper doll that has come to life, trying on multiple outfits before a mirror. After each costume change a hand intrudes from the corner of the screen, putting the doll and her dress back in their plastic album sleeves. The repetition of posing followed by powerlessness reflects Shermans ongoing fascination with the politics of identity and representation, particularly in relation to women. She has recalled making paper-doll versions of all of my own clothes as a teenager. This animated film was made while she was still an art student.
Hogarth's early success as a painter was based on his exceptionally lively small-scale 'conversation pieces', or informal group portraits, which became fashionable in the 1730s. They reflected the move away from the solemn formality of the previous generation and attempted to show the sitters in easy, natural poses, in a domestic setting, engaged in everyday activities like conversation or drinking tea. The main subject here is the wealthy city magnate William Strode, seated at table with his new wife Lady Anne Cecil, his relative Col. Strode, and his tutor Dr Arthur Smyth, later Archbishop of Dublin. The paintings on the wall are reminders of their recent tour of Italy. On the floor is the tea caddy.
Brooke Boothby was a Derbyshire landowner, and an amateur poet and philosopher. Wright shows him reclining by a stream, holding a book with Rousseau on its spine. This is a reference to Boothbys pride in having published the first volume of the Swiss philosophers autobiographical Dialogues in 1780. In deference to Rousseaus ideas, Boothby seems to shun the civilised world to think deeply, alone with nature.
Gallery label, September 2004
This work belongs to the transitional period for Rothko. In the early 1940s he had used references to ancient myth to express the brutal anxieties of a world at war. Increasingly, however, he saw literal depictions of mythic subjects as inhibiting the viewers response. Describing the biomorphic forms in paintings such as this, he wrote: every shape becomes an organic entity, inviting the multiplicity of associations inherent in all living things.
Since the late 1960s Long has been making works that originate in carefully planned walks in the countryside. His peregrinations act as drawings that inscribe physical or metaphorical marks into the landscape. When Long brings natural materials into the gallery environment he places them in simple,geometric arrangements, as here with red slate from the border of Vermont and New York State. This configuration emphasises the tension between conceptual structure and organic matter. Long stated: A circle outdoors focuses our attention on the environment it is in, while indoors the circle and materials demand the attention.
This is one of a series of five paintings by  Hamilton that explore the relationship between  women and cars, an association that had become a  cliche of advertisements then in vogue. The image  is somewhat abstracted due to the elimination of  certain details and the way the remaining areas  appear as disconnected shapes and marks. Such  passages echo abstract paintings of the period.  Nevertheless, the centre of the image can be read  as a voluptuous woman, identifiable by her red  lips and diagrammatic bra, seen caressing a  gleaming car. These elements were derived from, or  inspired by, adverts and popular imagery, themes  which preoccupied Hamilton and other artists  associated with the Independent Group in London.
The source for Bowers drawing is an illustration by the British artist Walter Crane (18451915), published in The Clarion, a socialist magazine, in 1894. Emphasising a continuous tradition of political activism, Bowers recreated the image on sections of cardboard boxes, using a permanent marker pen. She had seen similar materials used to construct placards by twenty-first century protestors such as the Occupy Wall Street encampment. She also altered some of the text on Cranes banners to reflect more recent political campaigns.
Commentators have differed in their interpretation  of this watercolour. The German critic Will  Grohmann, for example, saw the figure as a  'fashionable lady, who is spite of her striking  elegance is more or less helpless in face of the  oppressive spirits'. In the Bauhaus where Klee  taught in this period the work was known, he said,  as 'The English Miss'. Others emphasise the erotic  connotations of the imagery, and Klee's use of  arrows as phallic symbols. For Christain Geelhaar  the 'young lady's adventure' referred to in the  title is sexual in nature.
This view of Malvern Hall in Warwickshire, seen from raised ground across a stretch of water, recalls a long tradition of country house portraiture which goes back to the seventeenth century. Yet it appears to have been painted for Constables own interest rather than being a formal, commissioned work. The sun is sinking below the trees to the left, which cast long shadows across the lawn at the back of the house. Above them hovers a flight of rooks. Many years later Constable wrote that the cawing of a rook was a voice which instantaneously placedmy youth before me.
Studland Beach is in a quiet bay in Dorset. The idea of the beach as a place for leisure activities was relatively new in 1912. It is a sign of their modernity that Vanessa Bell and her Bloomsbury Group friends holidayed there. This is one of several works by Bell from 19112 which show a debt to Matisse in their simplified design and bold colouring. Though an exercise in what her friends, the critics Clive Bell and Roger Fry, called significant form (emphasising colour, shape and line rather than subject matter), the picture retains some of the feel of a sunny day by the sea.
The Alps were a familiar landscape
This canvas was never exhibited and is probably unfinished, but remains one of Turner's most powerful statements on the Romantic theme of maritime disaster. Its pyramidal composition leaves little doubt that Turner had seen Gricault's Raft of the Medusa (now in the Louvre, Paris) described by one critic as this tremendous picture of human sufferings, when it was exhibited in London in 1822. Turner's own subject is the wreck of the Amphitrite off Boulogne in 1833. The ship's captain abandoned his cargo of female convicts, claiming that he was only authorised to land them in New South Wales.
This scene represents a moment of complex moral dilemma for Claudio and Isabella, characters from Shakespeares Measure for Measure. Claudio has been sentenced to death by Angelo, deputy to the duke of Vienna. He can only be saved if his sister, Isabella, sacrifices her virginity to Angelo. Claudios awkward pose draws attention to his prison shackles. The apple blossom blown by the wind at his feet symbolises his readiness to buy his own reprieve with Isabellas chastity. Her white habit emphasises her purity. Holman Hunt summarised the moral of his picture as: Thou shall not do evil that good may come.
Gallery label, April 2005
Originally conceived as a performance at the Situation Gallery in 1971, McLean's poses are an ironic and humorous commentary on what he considered to be the pompous monumentality of Henry Moore's large plinth-based sculptures. The artist later had himself photographed, repeating the poses, to create three permanent works, two of which are shown here.
This great family piece is something of a puzzle. It apparently takes its inspiration from the elaborate dynastic tombs of the period, where the living and the dead are shown intermingled. Sir Richard Saltonstall draws back the red curtain round the bed that contains his deceased first wife, who gestures towards the couples two surviving children. He, meanwhile, gazes towards his second  living  wife, who sits holding her own Saltonstall baby. Des Granges, traditionally said to have produced this picture, mainly painted small-scale portrait miniatures.
This work was made at the time of Kounelliss first involvement with arte povera. The carefully dyed but loosely wrapped hanks of uncarded wool epitomise Kounelliss choice of simple materials at this time. Linked with arte poveras exploration of basic media, they also suggest Kounelliss attraction to earlier civilisations. Although he had abandoned painting at this stage in his career, he later suggested that the structure of this work had been partly inspired by Jackson Pollock, with the hanging wool teased out to mimic dripped paint.
Dijkstra worked on a number of portraits of young bathers, known as the Beaches series, between 1992 and 1996, and then again in 1998. Each time, she chose a similar location and set her camera  at a relatively low viewpoint before inviting her subjects to pose. Dijkstra demands the same degree of concentration from her sitters as she has herself in preparing the shot. As a result,  her images are filled with psychological intensity. Each bather seems to scrutinise the camera, as they, in turn, are scrutinised by it.
St John belongs to a series called the London Paintings, each named after one of the chapels of Westminster Abbey. The titles are not meant to be descriptive, but refer merely to associations connected with the artists visits to London. Since 1980 Richter has made his abstract paintings by manipulating spatulas of different lengths, loaded with paint, across areas of the canvas. New layers of colour cover earlier ones. Richters inability to control the precise distribution of paint allows a degree of chance to determine the paintings final appearance.
Several generations of one family are shown celebrating the wedding of a young sailor and his wife. Forbes set the scene in a local inn, and used non-professional models. Forbes was the leader of a group of painters who settled in the Cornish fishing village of Newlyn. They were attracted by the quality of the Cornish light and the survival of a traditional way of life. The painting reflects many of the Newlyn Schools aims. It was sold to Henry Tate, and with the profit Forbes was able to marry the artist Elizabeth Armstrong.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
I just wanted to paint a white and grey picture that would still have colour in its veins as we have blood under our winter-white skin, Tanning wrote of this work. Her engagement with surrealism began in the 1940s when she married Max Ernst. She has observed of herself: as someone...who has chosen art, the making of it, the dedication to it, the breathing of it, this artist has pursued with a high heart that great aim; and has utterly failed to understand the pigeon-holing (or dove-coterie) of gender, convinced that it has nothing to do with qualifications or goals.
Gallery label, July 2008
This picture was strongly attacked by the critics  when it was first exhibited in 1887, and dismissed  by one as 'either a deliberate daub or so much  mere midsummer madness'. Steer considered giving  up painting in the wake of this disapproval. With  its exploitation of the creamy fluency of oil  paint, its atmospheric lighting and subdued  colouring, 'The Bridge' is like Whistler's  landscapes he called 'Nocturnes'. It was unusual  in London at the time for its lack of detail, and  for the uncertainly about its subject. The view is  probably at Walberswick in Suffolk.
De Stal used the title Composition
Like many of Lowry's pictures this is not a depiction of a particular place, but is based on recollections of a school seen in Lancashire. Lowry's combination of observation and imaginative power often produced images which capture a deeply felt experience of place, with which others could identify. For example, in 1939 John Rothenstein, then Director of the Tate Gallery, visited Lowry's first solo exhibition in London and later wrote: 'I stood in the gallery marvelling at the accuracy of the mirror that this to me unknown painter had held up to the bleakness, the obsolete shabbiness, the grimy fogboundness, the grimness of northern industrial England.' This work was then purchased by the Trustees.
In common with much of Andrews's work this picture is partly autobiographical. It was painted for his Diploma Examination shortly before leaving the Slade School of Art to face a period of uncertainty. He later commented that this painting was 'about the complete upsetting of someone's apparently secure equilibrium and about their most immediate efforts at recovery and their attempt to conceal that they have perhaps been badly hurt or upset'. This might explain why the man seems to grin instead of crying out in shock. The image of the body destablised in space was of interest to a number of artists in the 1950s, including Francis Bacon and Anthony Caro.
Russian-born constructivist Naum Gabo first came to England in 1935, and spent the war years in Cornwall. It was there, near St Ives, that he began to use nylon filament in his sculpture. Space and time remained Gabos main artistic preoccupations and with his sculpture he aimed to produce a self-contained object that would suggest the universal and infinite. Writing of Gabos work, the critic Herbert Read said that it hovered between the visible and the invisible, the material and the immaterial, becoming the crystallization of the purest sensibility.
Gallery label, February 2004
Gin and tonic became Gilbert and George's drink of choice in 1971. They picked Gordon's because it was 'the best gin'. For this film, they have added their names to the bottle's label, on either side of the Royal crest. The artists are shown seated at a table, getting drunk to a soundtrack of Elgar and Grieg. Their deadpan expressions and repeated declaration that 'Gordon's makes us very drunk' creates an absurd scene that ironically questions identity, nationality and 'good behaviour'.
Though purely geometrical as its name suggests, the form of this sculpture has some lingering associations with shells. Hepworths skill as a carver is exemplified by the spiral on the outside of the sculpture, which begins with a sharp edge, gradually softening as it proceeds, and finishes as a curved edge. The sculpture was complete by April 1938, when it was exhibited in Amsterdam. It was later acquired by friends of Hepworth, and displayed outdoors for many years.
This photo-based work raises questions about the effect of the diaspora of the African peoples - their historical dispersion across the world through slavery and colonisation - on the identity and representation of black people. Boyce is the 'English born Native' of the title. The picture developed from a desire to consider the relationship between her own 'self-image' and the one offered by a predominantly white society through the mass media. The scale of the work and its reference to Hollywood heroes such as Tarzan and Rambo point to the power of film to perpetuate sterotypes. Photobooth portraits of the artist dominate the image. They refer in part to voodooo trance, often parodied in Hollywood films.
Group portraits
On 16 October 1834 Turner was among the huge throng of people who watched the burning of the old Houses of Parliament. Subsequently he made two paintings, seen from the Surrey side of the Thames, showing the fire at its height and diminishing somewhat. Both these are in the USA, at the museums of Philadelphia and Cleveland respectively. There are nine watercolours, of which this is one, which are usually thought to be of the fire. However, not all authorities agree on this.
In 1950 Chagall began work on two large murals to  decorate the auditorium of the newly-opened  Watergate theatre in London. 'The Dance and the  Circus' and 'The Blue Circus' are studies for  these murals. Chagall loved both the theatre and  the circus. He had painted several other murals to  decorate the Jewish State Theatre in Moscow much  earlier in 1919-20. At this time, he had also been  involved in a number of theatrical productions,  and had designed stage sets and costumes. Later,  in New York, Chagall designed sets for both  the ballet and the opera, and was commissioned to  paint murals to decorate the Metropolitan Opera  House.
Perspex Group on Orange (B) is one of a series of coloured constructions known as the LargePerspex Group Martin made shortly before her death. In keeping with the artists rigorously abstract aesthetic based on mathematical principles, the size of each plane is determined by the Fibonacci series. Thus, in succession, the dimensions of each plane are determined by using the largest dimension of the one preceding. The artist made four different permutations out of the 720 possible with six elements.
Moment is one of Newmans first paintings to include a vertical band of light, which he would soon call a zip. He said that in these early works he was manipulating colour and space to fight the chaos that existed before the beginning of the universe. The title refers to the moment of creation, and possibly a moment of arrival for art. Abstract Expressionism, characterised by spontaneous-looking mark-making, was developed by Newman, among others, in the 1940s and 1950s. It put New York at the centre of the western art world, a role formerly held by Paris.
Gallery label, September 2004
In 1982 the artist wrote, 'the most interesting characteristic of the cube is that it is relatively uninteresting. It is best used as a basic unit for any more elaborate function, the grammatical device from which the work may proceed.' This sculpture is one of a group on the same scale, beginning with a single cube and using it as a building block or module in various combinations. This is the key example of the 'half-off' sculptures, where the cubes abut along half of one side instead of being aligned. The series includes works with three half-off cubes and with five half-off cubes alternately projecting and receding in a zig-zag. There are potentially many additions to the basic form.
This modern-life picture shows a prostitute in her lodgings overlooking the Thames. Her situation is indicated by the shabby interior with jewellery and money strewn across her dressing table, and the mans glove and walking stick on the floor. Waterloo Bridge and Hungerford Bridge are shown in the distance straddling the busy polluted river. A sickly-looking plant by the womans side suggests her impending doom.
Gallery label, September 2004
The series of photographs called Signs... brought Wearing international recognition when it was first exhibited in 1993. This selection of five images shows the range of responses which Wearing elicited  from passers-by, whom she selected  at random, and asked to write their thoughts on a piece of paper. Wearing challenges social stereotypes and assumptions, and often works in collaboration with members of the  public as a means of 'interrupting the logic of photo-documentary and snapshot photography.' She has said 'A great  deal of my work is about questioning handed-down truths.'
Both the man shown here, Sir Neil ONeill, and the artist, John Michael Wright, were Catholics. As a result of anti-Catholic legislation Wright was exiled from London to Dublin in 1679, where this work must have been painted. Sir Neil (?16581690) is shown in the richly ornamented costume of an Irish chieftain. Beside him is an Irish wolfhound, a valuable breed of dog whose export from Ireland was forbidden in 1652. At his feet is a rare suit of Japanese armour. This may be seen as a trophy representing victory over persecutors of Catholicism, among whom the Japanese were notorious at the time.
This is the first abstract Ben Nicholson painted and is one of only a few such works made by British artists in this period. Younger, avant-garde artists tended to concentrate on still life and landscape in the twenties using them as vehicles for formal experiment. Only three early abstract paintings by Nicholson are known and all of them display evidence of a sophiscated understanding of Cubism and its insistence on shallow space and overlapping planes. This painting was very advanced in the context of British art in this period, where the notion of abstraction was essentially equated with the distortion of natural appearance.
Gallery label, July 2008
This seemingly straightforward arrangement of objects alludes to several major themes of the period. The wider world is referred to by the globe and the atlas. A political element is included through the transcript of a speech delivered by William III to Parliament, concerning the disbandment of the army. 

But is the painting wholly worldly, or does it have a more philosophical element? The Latin motto on the left translates as Life is short, but art endures.
This pastel is one of the most delicately executed and finely resolved of all Degas' studies of the nude. It belongs to a celebrated series of pastels of women at their toilette produced in the mid-1880s, a group of which was included in an exhibition of Impressionist painters in Paris in 1886. Critics varied in their reactions to these works. Some praised the way Degas showed plausible, modern women rather than idealized goddesses. Others complained of the models' ugliness and suggested they were prostitutes. In this pastel, however, there are no indications of the woman's social class or line of work.
Seurat painted this work while holidaying on the Normandy coast in the summer of 1885. He made a study of this motif on the spot, but would have refined and developed the image in the studio. Seurat aimed to place painting on a scientific basis in its treatment of light and colour and, using a style known as Divisionism, juxtaposed small brushstrokes of complementary colours to create a luminous effect in his works. He painted the border on the canvas, but the frame is much later in date.
Seedbed was the most notorious of the three performances at Sonnabend. In an otherwise empty gallery a ramp was constructed over the floor extending from the centre of the gallery to the back wall. During the times the work was activated, on Wednesdays and Saturdays during the exhibition, Acconci positioned himself in the confined space under the ramp and repeatedly masturbated, using the sound of visitors walking above him to fuel his sexual fantasies.
A friend of the Surrealist poet Ren Crevel, Wood made a small number of paintings that seem to reflect the movement's harnessing of the unexpected. His placement of a zebra outside Le Corbusiers modernist house, the Villa Savoie (then still under construction), suggests a deliberate confrontation of the surreal and the functional styles that were then dominant in Paris. The image is made more perplexing by the figure of the parachutist. This was one of Wood's last works: in a paranoid state, he fell under a train in August 1930.
Heron was a critic and painter who championed an approach to painting that assessed quality according to such formal values as the flatness of a composition and colour. Of his stripe paintings he wrote, The reason why the stripes sufficed ... was precisely that they were so very uncomplicated as shapes ... the emptier the general format was, the more exclusive the concentration upon the experiences of colour itself. Heron resisted the total abandoning of subject matter and even such works as this have been seen in relation to landscape, the horizontal bands and colours perhaps suggesting the horizon at sunset.
Grimshaw was famous for his night scenes, in particular for his views of the docks at Liverpool, Glasgow and Hull. Here he concentrates on the golden glow cast from shop fronts through fog, and reflected on wet cobbles. The omnibus receding from the viewer down a perfectly straight street is a characteristic and effective device, which the artist repeated many times. He was entirely self-taught, and had begun life as a railway clerk. He was much influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites, but gradually moved towards a more ethereal evocation of light and atmosphere reminiscent of Whistler.
In the 1930s Brockhurst became a sought after portrait painter. Paintings such as thisrepresented a fashionable assimilation of past with present, a modern expressionof traditional artistic values. Combining rich decoration with subtle assessment ofcharacter, Brockhurst specialised in painting rich, famous and often highly independentwomen. This is a portrait of the socialite Margaret Sweeney, Duchess of Argyll.The dramatic landscape background of volcanic mountains and loch allude to thesitters Scottish heritage of which she was intensely proud.
This magazine sculpture was published in the journal Studio International in 1970, where it was shown in black and white with the offending words censored. Gilbert & George have described this work as an attempt to pre-empt criticism of themselves: we knew there was a battle ahead and we wanted to be in there first, long before somebody could say we werent good artists, we couldnt draw or we couldnt paint, long before all that criticism began, we had already attacked ourselves, called ourselves a Shit and a Cunt.
Whiteread is best known for her sculptural casts of hidden interior spaces, such as the underside of a chair or the gap beneath floorboards.  This drawing relates to her sculptures in its suggestion of space.  It was inspired by the parquet floor of a flat she was living in at the time. The thick texture of white correction fluid gives it solidity, while the graph paper, of the type used by architects, adds to the impression of three-dimensional space.  The repeating patterns in Whiteread`s work echo abstract, Minimalist art, but her subjects remain rooted in everyday life, as here in the reference to the floor.
This is one of a series of four pictures, all the  same size, painted in the spring of 1936. In the  first the woman's hands meet in the centre of the  picture and the entire lower leg is depicted. This  painting, the second in the series, shows Matisse  concerned to relate the figure to the edges of the  picture: her body fills the space, and the  position of her arms, in particular, appears to  emphasise the shape of the canvas. The floral  patterning of the woman's gown and the exotic  plant behind her serve as quiet reminders of the  theme of the harem girl, or odalisque, which was  central to Matisse's work.
A clarinet lies on a mantelpiece at the centre of this playful work. In front of it stands a bottle with the characters RHU, the first three letters of the French word for rum. The word Valse (Waltz) introduces the idea of dancing, reinforcing the theme of music evoked by the clarinet and suggestions of treble and bass clefs. The scrolled form in the lower right-hand corner could stand for either the bracket of the mantelpiece or the head of an instrument.
This painting of a train arriving in Paris attempts to express movement and conflicting energies through its fractured, interpenetrating forms. Like all the Italian futurists, Severini was inspired by modern machinery and was enthusiastic about the idea of war. In June 1915 he stayed for some weeks just outside Paris where the sight of trains passing close by day and night laden with munitions, soldiers or wounded prompted the creation of this work.
In May 1963, a group of black school children and students were marching peacefully for equal rights in Birmingham, Alabama. Police used powerful fire hoses to break up the march, injuring many of the young protestors. Gates has arranged strips of decommissioned fire hoses to resemble the composition of a 1960s American abstract painting  a form that pointedly failed to engage with the Civil Rights movement. Gates also questions whether the protestors goals have been fulfilled. Some of us are slightly better while others are a great deal better, he has reflected, but things are far from equal.
Mondrians fascination with trees developed out of his earlier landscape painting. This is one of his last paintings of trees and is based on realistic sketches made in the Netherlands. After settling in Paris and absorbing the influence of Cubism, Mondrian reworked the image almost to abstraction. The trunk and branches are condensed to a network of verticals and horizontals. He acknowledged the inspiration of nature but added, I want to come as close as possible to the truth, and abstract everything from that until I reach the foundation of things.
Like Antony Gormley, Mark Quinn uses 

his own body in the making of his art. 

No Visible Means of Escape is a hollow polyurethane rubber cast of Quinn's naked body, split up to the neck. The 

cast is suspended from a rope tied around the feet. Quinn describes it as 

'an extreme moment of transformation, 

a violent shedding of the skin'.
'The igloo is the ideal organic form' according  to Mario Merz, who equates it with the basic structures built by ancient nomadic cultures.  This work addresses the theme of shelter and  the relation of humans to their environment  and community. Merz was part of the Arte Povera movement, which adopted a revolutionary stance against consumerist society, and deliberately made their work from humble materials. He began constructing igloos in 1968, in response  to student and worker political demonstrations  in Italy and France. The early igloos carried slogans linking them directly with the utopian ideals of the protesters.
This portrait depicts two young aristocrats. Dressed in quasi-historical clothing invented by the artist, they are mimicking a medieval or Renaissance hunt; the dead game they leave in their trail underlining their noble blood and aristocratic right to hunt. This painting celebrates their friendship by linking it to an imaginary chivalric past, when young lords pursued manly activities together against a backdrop of ancient forest. The subjects are shown in perfect harmony  at one with each other and joint masters over nature.
At the heart of Souzas Crucifixion is the body of Christ transformed through suffering. Souza was born in the Catholic province of Goa in western India. In the 1950s, he was among the first of the post-Independence generation of Indian artists to establish a career in Britain. His depiction of the agonised black Christ addresses his own feelings of religious conflict, as well as cultural tensions between black and white, Christian and non-Christian, colonised and colonising societies.
Lichtenstein returned to the theme of still life  in his paintings and prints of the mid-1970s by  exploring traditional composition and subject  matter. In addition to using standard still life  objects in these compositions, the artist began to  insert representations of his own works or those  by other artists such as Matisse, Lger and Morris  Louis. This print is from a series entitled 'Six  Still Lifes' in which Lichtenstein presented a  variety of still life types. Here the conventions  of old master still life painting  a dish of  fruit, a single lemon, and a curtain used as a  framing device  are joined by a portrait of a  woman who resembles Lichtenstein's own idealised  beauties from the romance comics paintings of the  1960s.
Horn has described how this mask alters her interaction with others: With the feathers I caress the face of a person standing close to me. The intimate space between us is filled with tactile tension. My sight is obstructed by the feathers. I can only see the face of the other when I turn my head looking with one eye like a bird. Through her mimicry of bird movements, Horn suggests the use of plumage as a device for communication and sexual display.
This painting is set in the artists garden in the wealthy north London suburb of St Johns Wood. It features its distinctive cast-iron colonnade enclosing a large ornamental fishpond. St Johns Wood was considered a rather louche area and this picture of young people flirting, unnoticed by their sleeping chaperone, was considered by some to be rather vulgar. The men are wearing the caps of I Zingari, an elite amateur cricket club.James Tissot had fled to London in 1870 after the fall of the Paris Commune, and stayed until 1882.
Vordemberge-Gildewart was one of the first painters to work throughout his career in an abstract style. In 1924 he became a member of the De Stijl group and in 1932 he joined the Abstraction-Cration group in Paris. Trained in interior design and architecture, Vordemberge initially made reliefs and sculptures. By 1923, he wrote, he 'started making deliberate use of colour' in making paintings. This is one of his earliest paintings and exemplifies what he called 'Absolute art'; namely art without content or object. Colour, form, contrast and space were the only objects.
Gallery label, July 2004
In this photograph, Cahun could be said to be wearing the rock as a mask or costume. At the same time the work brings alive an inanimate object. It relates both to her interest in performing different identities and to the surrealist celebration of surprising and resonant combinations.
Icarus and his father Daedulus escaped from prison from the Greek island of Crete by using pairs of wings which they made from feathers and wax. Icarus, however, flew too near to the sun, the wax melted and he fell into the sea and drowned. Gilbert stated that he chose the theme because, It flashed across me that I was very ambitious: why not Icarus with his desire for flight? The subject represented the risk of his own ambition. The vibrant surface and themes of death and the recklessness of youth, lend Gilberts nude a dimension of sensual eroticism.
Dobson's first wife died in September 1634. It is thought that he married his second wife, Judith, soon after. This small scale portrait was probably painted to celebrate the second marriage. At the same time Dobson painted a self-portrait (which is now in a private collection).
Gallery label, September 2004
Tim Head first came to prominence in the early 1970s with a series of ground-breaking installations and conceptual photographs. This is from a group of six photographic works which play on mirror-image illusions to create paradoxes and question how we view reality. In Ambidextrous the mirror held by a right hand reflects an identical mirror held by a left hand, provoking questions over perception and deceit. Head believed that the accessibility of photography strengthens its ability to actas a portal for examination of society and the man-made environment.
In Marilyn Monroe, Warhol found a fusion of two of his consistent themes: death and the cult of celebrity. The star died tragically in August 1962.  In the following two years, Warhol made thirty silkscreen paintings of her, always using the same publicity photograph from the 1953 film Niagara. This set of ten screenprints was produced in 1967, in an edition of 250. The repeated image serves as the basis for a series of startling colour transformations.
The sitter in this portrait is Emily Scobel, a model from the Slade School of Art. Orpen was briefly engaged to her. The room is apparently an accurate portrayal of Orpens lodgings, but the shallow pictorial depth and decorative, or aesthetic, arrangement of objects is based on Whistlers famous portrait of his mother in profile. The concave mirror on the wall reflects the artist painting at his easel. This is a device which Orpen borrowed from a 15th-century painting by Jan van Eyck, The Arnolfini Portrait, which he would have seen on display at the National Gallery.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
In this work, Bonnard unites interior and exterior in the strong sunlight of the South of France. It was made in a rented apartment at Le Cannet, the town which the artists wife Marthe is seen surveying from the balcony. The sensuality and warmth of the south entranced Bonnard, but in his paintings he habitually framed the landscape with windows or doorways, as if submitting the abundance of nature to human control.
Martin was interested in the relationship between art and architecture, and made a number of reliefs for public spaces. This work emerges from her interest in contemporary architecture. She was mindful of the relationship between the object and the wall behind it, but also the questions of proportion and variation involved in designing large structures. The ninety-six aluminium panels are positioned according to a sequence of permutations, which are then repeated backwards as the inversions of the title.
This sculpture reflects the interplay between abstract and figurative forms in Moores work. I have done other sculptures based on this idea of one form being protected by another Moore recalled. I suppose in my mind was also the Mother and Child idea and of birth and the child in embryo. All these things are connected in this interior and exterior idea. Later versions of the sculpture were made in bronze and elm wood, and a twenty foot high cast is sited in the atrium of Three First National Plaza in Chicago.
Helen Smith was the daughter of a wealthy Tyneside businessman and politician. She married the stockbroker and music connoisseur Robert Harrison, of Shiplake Court in Henley-on-Thames. Like many of Sargents patrons the Harrisons were part of late Victorian high society. But they had unconventional taste, as Mrs Harrisons dress shows. When the portrait was exhibited at the 1886 Royal Academy one commentator exclaimed that she had never seen Mrs Harrison wearing such red wing-like appendages to her costume, which look as though about to expand and convey her to the regions of Mephistopheles.
In 1950, at the age of 62, Albers began what would become his signature series, the Homage to the Square. Over the next 26 years, until his death in 1976, he produced hundreds of variations on the basic compositional scheme of three or four squares set inside each other, with the squares slightly gravitating towards the bottom edge. What may at first appear to be a very narrow conceptual framework reveals itself as one of extraordinary perceptual complexity. In 1965, he wrote of the series: They all are of different palettes, and, therefore, so to speak, of different climates. Choice of the colours used, as well as their order, is aimed at an interaction - influencing and changing each other forth and back. Thus, character and feeling alter from painting to painting without any additional hand writing or, so-called, texture. Though the underlying symmetrical and quasi-concentric order of squares remains  the same in all paintings  in proportion and placement  these same squares group or single themselves, connect  and separate in many different ways.
Emma Lake in Saskatoon, Canada, was the site of a workshop where Caro made fifteen sculptures in August 1977. Since the relative inaccessibility of the location made it difficult to transport heavy materials, he used steel tubing and beams. These lighter materials reflected his concern at the time with non-monumental sculpture. Caro's work was becoming increasingly linear, enclosing space in cage-like constructions. The opening to the left creates the sense of an internal space, which is penetrated and activated by the tubes and rods.
In this postcard collage Oldenburg raised an everyday cosmetic item to a monumental scale. Made during his stay in London at the height of the swinging sixties, it embodies the popular, expendable, sexy imagery of Pop art. Oldenberg remarked: For me, London inspired phallic imagery which went up and down with the tide - like mini-skirts and knees ... like the up-and-down motion of a lipstick. To replace the Victorian statue of Eros in Piccadilly Circus with lipsticks lifted from an advertisement was, therefore, to update one vision of sexuality with another.
Gilman was a member of the Camden Group of painters whose commitment to the painting of everyday life is typified in this work. Mrs Mounter was the artists landlady. He shows her with a blank, perhaps melancholy expression. She seems almost dominated by the very ordinary tea pot, jug and cups which speak, perhaps, of a simple life. Such simplicity in a painting would have seemed radical to audiences used to seeing more lavish subjects.
This sculpture is a scale model of the Burj El Murr building in Beirut, Lebanon. The tower was owned by members of the el-Murr family, a prominent political clan. Construction began in 1974 but it was left unfinished after the outbreak of civil war. Originally an office block, it was only ever used as a sniper outpost. The tower is too tall to knock down and too dense to implode, and so continues to dominate the skyline. It is now seen as a memorial to the internal conflict that has never really been resolved.
Cosmos and Disaster reflects Siqueiross technical experiments with paint thickened by grit and splinters. The pessimistic theme almost certainly echoes his response to the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. While his earlier works were dominated by huge figures, and communicated strident political messages, the near-abstraction here seems 
to convey his despair. He soon volunteered for the International Brigade opposing Francos forces. Photographs of the obliterated landscapes of First World War trenches 
may have been a point of reference for 
the painting.
This picture shows the meeting of the Trojan prince Aeneas and the Carthaginian queen Dido, from Virgils epic poem, the Aeneid. Aeneas was shipwrecked near Carthage after the sack of Troy. The goddess Venus made Dido fall in love with him and helped him to hide in her citadel. He watches Dido welcome his fellow Trojans and when she asks to see their king the mist clears and Aeneas reveals his identity. Dance-Holland made this picture while he was in Rome and sent it to London to be exhibited as a way to advertise his imminent return to Britain.
Though apparently abstract, this painting represents a lane at Sandy Haven, Pembrokeshire. By paraphrasing what he observed, Sutherland felt he captured the essence of the landscape. This innovative technique fused the observational powers of John Constable with the daring of Pablo Picasso.The prominent black forms also reflect Sutherlands debt to the landscape drawings of Samuel Palmer, whose work enjoyed a revival in the 1930s. This painting belongs to a tradition of images of wooded landscapes which seem to enfold the viewer. In 1939, with war looming, such a natural refuge may have had special significance.
Arp felt that modern society had become over-dependent on reason. He hoped to redress the balance by developing an art that consciously evoked the forms and laws of nature without copying them. The rounded shapes in this relief may suggest clouds or planets, while the laws of the title are those of flux and chance that characterise the inaccessible order of nature. Arps interest in chance extended to the making of his reliefs. He ordered them from a craftsman, but left his instructions ambiguous in order to encourage the craftsmans free interpretation.
The Lord points down towards two beasts, Behemoth  and Leviathan, and instructs Job about the extent  and power of His creation. The right hand marginal  text, from the Book of Job, describes Behemoth,  who dominates the land, as 'the chief of the Ways  of God.' Leviathan, a Sea Monster, is 'King over  all the Children of Pride.' In his book  'Jerusalem' Blake has these two monsters  representatives of war by land and by sea. This  relationship is explicitly seen in Blake's two  pictures showing Admiral Nelson and William Pitt  included in this display. One interpretation of  this design is that these beasts stand for the  hopelessness of material nature. The Lord is  pointing out to Job the negativeness of his faith  so far.
Quattro Stagioni celebrates the annual cycle of spring, summer, autumn and winter, and Twomblys use of the four seasons to evoke the natural rhythms of death and rebirth is common in classical poetry and painting. Twombly uses strong colours to suggest the brilliant Mediterranean light and the essence of the different seasons, from vivid red and yellow in spring to deep greens and purples in autumn, combining these smears and drips of paint with scrawled poetic fragments, reminiscent of ancient graffiti, from several sources. While the lush, tactile qualities of the paint evoke bodily sensations, the poetry grounds these feelings in the broader context of classical culture. The curved forms that are visible in Primavera and Estate evoke traditional Egyptian rowing boats, imagery that appeared in Twomblys work after he spent several months in Egypt during the mid 1980s.
The purchase of a car in 1917 allowed Matisse to take all his painting equipment into the woods.  He made several works at Trivaux Pond, in the landscaped park of the Bois de Meudon on the outskirts of Paris. Here, the verticals of the trees establish a strong rhythm. Matisse treats the surface of the pond loosely, simplifying the forms and merging reflections with their surroundings. Although within the immediate environs of the city, Matisse imbued the park with an imagined ruralism.
When Spiral Theme was shown in wartime London, it was greeted with popular acclaim.  The transparent planes build upon and reveal  the sections below, suggesting emergence and growth. The critic Herbert Read hailed it as  'the highest point ever reached by the aesthetic intuition of man'. Gabo confessed: 'It is still a mystery and puzzle to me as to what precisely  it is ... that has moved their hearts.'
In the 1920s Matisse made some of his most seductive images of women. He often posed the models in oriental costume and, as here, against a patterned background, suggesting exoticism and richness. The soft veils of tone achieved with the charcoal mimic the quality of the skin and make it both a carefully realistic study and a sexually charged image.
Around 1913, Bomberg was interested in both Cubism and Futurism. He wanted to create a new visual language to express his perceptions of the modern industrial city. He wrote: the new life should find its expression in a new art, which has been stimulated by new perceptions. I want to translate the life of a great city, its motion, its machinery, into an art that shall not be photographic, but expressive.Works like this were based on simplified figure drawings. Bomberg superimposed a grid to break up the composition into geometric sections. These were painted different colours, partially obscuring the original subject.
After his first visit to Piet Mondrians Paris studio in 1934, Nicholson wrote:  [T]he thing I remembered most was the feeling of light ... The feeling in his studio must have been not unlike the feeling in one of those hermits caves where lions used to go to have thorns taken out of their paws.  Shortly afterwards Nicholson started to paint rectilinear arrangements in primary colours and tones of blue, grey and white.
Captain Shit is a superhero invented by Ofili, who has appeared in a number of his paintings since 1996. Partly inspired by the Marvel Comics character Luke Cage, Captain Shit is a symbol of black superstardom. The collaged black stars refer to the many untold stories of fame in black history. The distinctive surface of the painting was created by gradually building up layers of paint and resin, combined with paper cut-outs, glitter stars, map pins and elephant dung.
The hemispheres along the bar of Eva Hesses Addendum are positioned at increasing intervals determined by a fixed mathematical series. Many artists used serial systems at this time because they provided a way of composing sculptures without recourse to personal expression. Hesse hung rope cords from each hemisphere which fall to the ground in unpredictable curls. The regulated structure of the bar contrasts with the disordered appearance of the cords. But Hesse recognised that such systems were hardly rational, commenting that Serial art is another way of repeating absurdity.
Like many cubist works, Griss painting provides a revised experience of the everyday, whether in the studio or in a familiar caf. Glimpsed letters confirm the positions of the two objects: UM for rum, JOUR (of journal) for the newspaper. A table is indicated by the false wood-graining, a house-painters skill much admired by the cubists because it is identifiably an illusion. Gris interweaves these fragmentary images of the familiar into a complex, carefully balanced structure.
In the 1950s Hepworth found new ways in which to make abstract sculpture. Having previously    concentrated on carving, she made a number of constructions. One of the most finely balanced, this is a version of a larger work, Theme on Electronics (Orpheus), made for an electronics firm. The form and the title bring together ideas of a harmony between modern technology and musical composition.
Gallery label, September 2004
This work, one of three Pose Work for Plinths, was originally conceived as a performance at the Situation Gallery in 1971. McLeans poses are an ironic and humorous commentary on what he considered to be the pompous monumentality of Henry Moores large plinth based reclining sculptures. The artist was photographed repeating the poses from his performance. The plinth in McLeans work also functions as an ironic reference to its dogmatic rejection as a legitimate base for sculpture by Anthony Caro and others teaching at St Martins School of Art when McLean was a student there between 1963 and 1966.
Gwen John adored her cats, and depicted them  frequently. This one, a tortoiseshell named Edgar  Quinet, appears in most of her cat drawings,  sometimes with her kittens. The name was taken  from the address where John lived in 1904 when she  first had the cat, 19 boulevard Edgar Quinet in  Paris. When Edgar Quinet ran away in 1908, John  was devastated. In a letter to a friend, Ursula  Tyrwhitt, she wrote, 'when the cats make love I  run to see if my sweet is one of them'. She  composed a poem to her loss, 'Au Chat', which she  sent to Rodin.
Gallery label, April 2005
Genet was among the leading French writers of the twentieth century. Seeing himself as an outsider, he celebrated his homosexuality and criminal past in his work. He also wrote a short book on Giacometti. Like many of Giacomettis portraits, this work uses a reduced palette of colours, and gradually builds its likeness of Genet with a series of small tentative brushstrokes. This technique creates a tense, shifting outline around the figure, which parallels the rough, highly-worked surfaces of Giacomettis sculptures.
Tpies combined paint with dust, resin and other materials to create rough, densely worked surfaces, a technique that he called matter painting. He compared his sombrely coloured paintings to the weather-worn, heavily marked walls of the streets in his native Catalonia, which seemed to bear witness to the sufferings of the Civil War and the repressions of life under General Franco. The critic John Russell described these works as not so much painted as excavated from an idiosyncratic compound of mud, sand, earth, dried blood and powdered minerals.
This painting shows a corner of Matisses apartment in Paris, where he lived from 1899 to 1907. The subjects of domestic interiors and still lifes (such as the carefully arranged objects on the small stand here) were typical of Matisses works of the time. The sculpture casts on top of the wardrobe were his own work. He was attending life drawing and sculpture classes and much of his work in this period focuses on subject matter relating to his studio.
This ambitious portrait depicts various family members gathered around a painted portrait, possibly a recently deceased brother or a member of the present family group. Here, Romney celebrates the kinship of family life, while acknowledging, through the groups focus on the portrait upon the table, the vital role of the artist in articulating the sensibility which underlies the familial relationship. This type of intimate family portrait or conversation piece had been common in British art for several decades, although in the past it had been painted on a much smaller scale. However, Romney uses the life-size format more usually reserved for official, public portraiture.
Giacomettis fragile, elongated figures were seen as reflecting the precariousness and absurdity of life in the inhospitable landscape of war-scarred Europe. For his part, Giacometti insisted that he was attempting to convey his own experience of looking at people. However, this concern with visual truth was always fraught with uncertainty and doubt. He often reworked his sculpture over long periods before casting them in bronze, building up the clay model, then stripping it down, rebuilding and stripping again, as he gradually eroded the outline of the body to its essential core.
Since the early 1990s Sarah Lucas  has challenged sexual stereotypes in  a variety of provocative works. In this  series of self-portraits she turns against the art-historical tradition of the female seductress or muse, and presents  herself in a deliberately androgynous,  and occasionally aggressive, series of poses. She adopts masculine gestures  and stances, and shows herself in unisex clothing like jeans and T-shirts. These images also raise questions about the  role and appearance of the modern  artist. In contrast to the clich of the  artist as an anguished male, Lucas  shows herself as an ordinary person  in emphatically ordinary surroundings.
Guilhermina Suggia Was Portuguese, but lived in  London from 1914. She was a well-known musician,  particularly because a female cello soloist was  then a rarity. The portrait was begun for the  newspaper proprietor Edward Hudson, who had given  Suggia the Montagnana cello that she plays.  However the commission lapsed, and John continued  the painting for himself. He started again twice,  each time choosing a dress of a different colour,  a larger canvas and a pose in more extreme  profile.This has always been thought among the best of  John's portraits, for its convincing scale, the  accord between design and colour, and its finish.
This painting, which was originally titled after a poem by Thomas Hardy, is one of a number influenced by the landscape of Wiltshire and in particular by houses and gardens in Devizes. Inshaw has written 'my main aim was to produce a picture that held a moment in time, but unlike a photograph, which only records an event. I thought a painting could give a more universal, deeper meaning to that moment by composing one instant from lots of different unrelated moments.' He has written of 'the mystery and wonder I felt all around me in this magic place'. Provisional as supplied to British Airports Authority May 1990
Himid has alluded to the meaning of this work:  'Two women sit in a small boat tearing up  navigation charts: how many died crossing the  water ... can the past be replayed ... can the  future be different'. During the early 1980s, she  emerged as a key figure in the development of a  consciously black art in Britain. This picture  belongs to a group entitled 'Revenge', which  proposed black women's voices as alternatives  alongside those of white men. Here she reuses the  title of an etching by the Victorian artist James  Tissot, which shows a Highlander seated in a boat  between two women, but focuses on the women. It  is one of several paintings in which pairs of  black women symbolically re-address history.
Hesse's work is predominantly monochrome and based on simple progressions or repetitions. This is one of a series of drawings on graph paper that she began to make in 1966, filling the tiny squares with single circles. The apparently limited formula yields unexpectedly non-mechanical and lightly textured drawings.
Horn described using this mask in a performance exploring ideas of sexual availability and intimacy: My face is covered by two intertwined, closed feather wings. The person standing before me touches the feathers delicately, then separates and opens the wings. The spread wings stretch like long bird wings, and softly enclose around [both] our heads. The feather-enclosure isolates our heads from the surrounding environment, and forces us to remain intimately alone, together. The use of the mask is deliberately ambiguous and the performance implies a tension between tenderness and aggression.
Like its partner, Reapers, this picture presents a wholesome vision of agricultural work. Stubbss painstaking style and his close observation of nature conspire to present an illusion of straightforward realism. Yet the figures are orchestrated into a sort of rhythmic ballet which presents their labours as graceful rather than full of real effort, and the whole picture is carefully organised in the form of a pyramid. Many contemporaries thought the effect was too contrived: the dominant taste was for more informal-looking pictures of rural life.
Made over a three-year period in the 1970s, Temporary Dwellings records the details of the lives of immigrant communities in Istanbul, Paris and New York. The artist, who was born and raised in Istanbul before moving to Paris in 1965, became interested in the living and working conditions of migrants who settled in the capital cities in which she herself resided. The collaged panels and accompanying video recordings provide both a record of a particular time and place and an examination of socio-political situations.
The series of photographs called Signs... brought Wearing international recognition when it was first exhibited in 1993. This selection of five images shows the range of responses which Wearing elicited  from passers-by, whom she selected  at random, and asked to write their thoughts on a piece of paper. Wearing challenges social stereotypes and assumptions, and often works in collaboration with members of the  public as a means of 'interrupting the logic of photo-documentary and snapshot photography.' She has said 'A great  deal of my work is about questioning handed-down truths.'
Henry Moore's subject is the aged body. He made these drawings of his own hands when he was eighty-one and suffering from ill-health. 'Hands can convey so much' he said, 'they can beg or refuse, take or give, be open or clenched, show content or anxiety. They can be young or old, beautiful or deformed'.
Van der Leck began to paint completely abstract compositions after meeting Piet Mondrian in 1916. The following year, he became a co-founder of De Stijl, the Dutch magazine that promoted a highly geometric abstract art linked to spiritual and utopian ideas. However, he soon fell out with Mondrian and the other De Stijl artists, and began to include figurative elements in his work once more. This may be one of his few wholly abstract works, though it is possible that in its early stages the composition derived from a recognisable image such as a vase of flowers.
Giacometti joined the Surrealist group in 1931, when he was making disturbing and mysterious sculptures. The elongated forms of this figure echo ancient Egyptian and Greek art, but the fragmentary body is presented walking, as if encountered in a dream. At one stage, a head and feather-arms were added to the original plaster version. Giacometti removed them in recognition of the greater power of the simplified form.
Michaux was both a poet and a painter, but he spoke of drawing as a release from words: 'a new language, spurning the verbal'. His drawings are, nevertheless, calligraphic in character, often suggesting indecipherable writing. Between 1954 and 1962 he experimented with working under the influence of the drug mescaline. The early results were obsessively detailed, while the ink drawings show an intense repetition of slashing marks. Michaux described fighting with these blots, likening them to 'insatiable desires or knots of force, which are destined never to take form'.
From the late 1820s, Turner made regular visits to the fashionable resort of Margate, near the eastern tip of the county of Kent.  Travelling by steam boat, Turner could be there just a few hours after leaving central London. He is said to have particularly prized the coastal light, claiming that the skies over the Isle of Thanet were the most beautiful in Europe.
The precise identity of these women is unknown but they have traditionally been associated with the Lake family of Cannons house and estate in Middlesex, later the property of the Duke of Chandos. Portraits of women by Lely, like this one, tend to conform to the standards of ideal beauty which were current at court. In such paintings, the artist was more concerned with asserting a sense of glamour and sophistication than conveying individual personalities. The woman on the left is shown playing a French-made guitar, the latest fashion to arrive from Paris.
Hepworth settled in St Ives during the Second World War. Inspired by the local landscape, she began to sculpt her responses to the natural forms around her. Trevalgan is the name of a hill near her home. There, she wrote, the cliffs divide as they touch the sea facing west.  At this point, facing the setting sun across the Atlantic, where sky and sea blend with hills and rocks, the forms seem to enfold the watcher and lift him towards the sky. The sculpture is not a literal representation of the divided cliffs, but a personal expression of Hepworths physical and spiritual encounter with nature.
''I had to leave out a lot of things that one expects to see in a painting'', Martin has said of this work. ''I was painting about happiness and bliss and they are very simple states of mind I guess. Morning is a wonderful dawn, soft and fresh.'' She began making delicate hand-drawn grids in 1960. This painting is based on a rectangular system of co-ordinates, but the total effect is 

like an atmospheric veil.
The Backs were Matisses largest sculptures. Over twenty years he progressively refined the original pose, based on a woman leaning on a fence, until he achieved a massive simplicity. Matisses decision to show the back view of a woman on such a monumental scale was unorthodox. By concealing her face, he avoided the complexities of visual engagement between artist and model. This helped him to consider the nude as an arrangement of forms that he could simplify and stylise.
This is the last of three paintings by William Orchardson on the subject of an unhappy marriage. The empty space of the parquet floor emphasises the psychological tension between the couple. It suggests that their dispute might lead to more serious problems. When it was first exhibited these lines from a Tennysons poem Merlin and Vivien were published in the catalogue: It is the little rift within the lute, That by and by will make the music mute.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
This watercolour shows Satan as he once was, a perfect part of Gods creation, before his fall from grace. His orb and sceptre symbolise his role as Prince of this World. It is also an extreme example of the damaging effects of over-exposure to light. The sky was originally an intense blue, now only visible at the lower right edge. The only colours which have survived unaltered are  the vermilion red Blake used for the flesh, and red ochre in Satans wings. The paper has yellowed considerably. There is no evidence left of any yellow gamboge or pinkish red lakes.
This painting includes structures from three eras: a Greek column, a Gothic cathedral (Notre Dame) and a modern bridge. Agar claimed that this flight of the imagination was the first work in which she began to move towards a more surrealist style. She and her future husband, the writer Joseph Bard, were living in Paris at this time. It was there that they met Andr Breton and Paul Eluard, who, she later recalled, were among the poets and painters giving the kiss of life to surrealism, that sleeping beauty troubled by nightmares.
Untitled (I Am a Man), a 1988 painting by Ligon, takes its text from signs carried by striking black sanitation workers in Memphis in 1968. The slogan I Am a Man was a way of protesting that they were equal to their white counterparts, who were paid more for doing the same job. Here Ligon juxtaposes a reproduction of the 1988 painting with another that has been annotated by a conservator making a condition report on the work. The imperfections noted might simultaneously be read as a questioning of the self as well as recording the frailties of the object.
Matisse painted this work during an extended stay in a hotel in Nice in the south of France. Although the woman was probably a professional model, Matisse creates a sense of casual intimacy, and uses details in this anonymous setting to touch on serious themes. The distracted reader assumes the head-in-hand pose traditionally associated with melancholy, while the flowers and mirror are reminders of the transience of life.
Like the view from Richmond Hill, that upstream towards the City from Greenwich Park is one of the most prized prospects of the Thames.

From the pastoral foreground with grazing deer, Turner looks over the Queens House and Greenwich Hospital towards London where St Pauls Cathedral and the City churches rise through the smoky pall above the metropolis.  Turners own verses, presented when the picture was exhibited at his Gallery in 1809, describe the mingled beauty and energy of the scene.

[[on separate caption, or ???decal on wall, put the following verses:]]

Where burthend Thames reflect the crowded sail
Commercial care and busy toil prevail
Whoese murky veil, aspiring to the skies
Obscures thy beauty, and thy form denies
Save where thy spires pierce the doubtful air
As gleams of hope amidst a world of care
Lucas''s bawdy humour takes a darker turn in this work. She uses a variety of household objects to produce a witty metaphor for sexual activity. However, the comic references contrast with the sobering presence of a cardboard coffin. The title refers to a seminal text by the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud. He suggested that the drive for life is matched by an equal and opposite drive for death, so that pleasure is bound up with destruction.
'The Deer Park' was inspired by Norman Mailer's  novel of the same title. For Andrews, the novel  seemed to describe 'the world of Soho' whose clubs  and bars he had frequented. Rather than  illustrating the text, however, the painting  creates a new, imaginary situation involving a  cast of different characters. Its subject is  social behaviour 'where people are relaxed and  project images close to themselves'. The figures  are all based on photographs of people from show  business and literary worlds, past and present.  They include Marilyn Monroe, Brigitte Bardot and  the poet Rimbaud. The background is based on 'The  Boar Hunt' by Velasquez in the National Gallery,  London.
William Stott studied in Paris under the French painter, Jean-Lon Grme.  He also exhibited at the Paris Salon, where he was awarded a medal in 1882. This picture is an exercise in the type  of rural naturalism practised by French artists like Jules Bastien-Lepage, who were in turn influenced by      the group of painters working in the Cornish fishing village of Newlyn in England. Stott devotes considerable attention to the arrangement of the closely observed flowers and vegetation. This kind of detail appealed to more conservative elements of the British art world, such as the Royal Academy, where Stott frequently exhibited.
One critic, writing in 1943, described 

the Shelter Drawings in terms of natural phenomena. He compared the strange colours, scratchy lines and pitted surfaces to 'lichen of grey rock, the coloured texture of weather-worn stone, the fiery black and red of igneous formations of burning coal'.
Germanicus, the adopted son of the Roman Emperor, Tiberius, was the father of Caligula, and the grandfather of Nero. He died at Antioch, victim of either poison or magic. His devoted widow, Agrippina, brought his ashes back to Rome in an urn.
After the success of the engravings of 'The Book  of Job', Linnell commissioned Blake to make prints  of the Dante series as well. However by the time  of Blake's death in 1827 only seven engravings had  been made. This one illustrates a scene from Canto  5 of 'Hell'. Virgil shows Dante those 'whom love  bereav'd of life', including Paolo and Francesca.  The daughter of a thirteenth-century lord of  Ravenna, Francesca fell in love with her husband's  brother, Paolo. The betrayed husband had them both  put to death. Dante, full of compassion, faints.  Paolo and Francesca are also shown, truly united,  above Virgil's head. Blake's original watercolour  is in the City Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham.
Since the 1960s, LeWitt has made three-dimensional work using basic geometric units, such as cubes and squares, arranged in pre-determined mathematical sequences. He  has written: ?To work with a plan that is  pre-set is one way of avoiding subjectivity.  It also obviates the necessity for designing  each work in turn. The plan would design  the work.? The objects are made by assistants according to LeWitt?s instructions. By minimising his physical presence in the process of fabrication, LeWitt emphasises the impersonality of these structures.
Blind James (white) is one of a group of blind portraits Gordon has created by excising the eyes from publicity stills of Hollywood stars of the 1950s and 1960s. This image features actor James Mason. The simple gesture of removing the actors eyes renders the image sinister and emphasises the mask-like nature of Masons role as actor and icon. Gordon is fascinated by dualities and the tension between good and evil. The excision of eyes in this work may suggest an unknowable alter-ego hidden behind the polished veneer of the portrait.
The representation of modern life was a major theme for Lger, who frequently depicted geometrical forms resembling machinery during the late 1910s and 1920s. I have used mechanical elements a lot in my pictures he wrote to his dealer Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler. The modern way of life is full of such elements for us; we must know how to use them. This drawing is calmer and more restrained than Lgers earlier Mechanical Elements compositions, perhaps reflecting his close contact in the mid-1920s with the artistic movement known as Purism.
Medalla has described himself as a poet who celebrates physics, combining science and nature with art. He has made a number of cloud machines which are meant as a kind of living system; the machine produces a steady flow of tiny bubbles that refract light into rainbows. In such works Medalla employs technology to produce forms that are organic, sensual, shifting and playful. The streams of bubbles evoke cells yet also embody the ephemeral, hovering between a material presence and an immaterial nothingness.
Hirsts work deals with dilemmas of human existence, including the fragility of life and societys reluctance to confront death. An office table and chair are enclosed in a steel-framed glass vitrine, or cell. On the table are a packet of cigarettes, a lighter and an ashtray. According to Hirst, cigarettes relate to the cyclical nature of life, the cigarette representing life and the ashtray death. The inevitability of death is also evoked by the entrapment suggested by the title, and confirmed by the enclosed glass cell.
After he was received into the Roman Catholic  church in 1921, Jones went to live with the artist  Eric Gill and his family. The two figures in this  picture represent Jones, and Gill's daughter  Petra. The picture was painted to mark their  engagement in June 1924, when Petra was not quite  eighteen. The title alludes to the Song of  Solomon, chapter 4, v.12 'A garden inclosed is my  sister, my spouse'. An enclosed garden is also  frequently used as a symbol for the virginity of  the Virgin Mary. The geese, sacred to the  classical goddess Juno and associated with young  girls, flee from the embracing couple, alarmed by  their passion. The doll on the ground may  symbolise lost childhood.
Turner casts the famous prospect westwards from Richmond Hill in a classic style evoking the French painter Claude Lorrain and himself in a cultural continuum.  The poets Alexander Pope and James Thomson, whose Summer he quoted with the picture, and the painter Joshua Reynolds had lived at Richmond or nearby at Twickenham where Turner had his own property, Sandycombe Lodge.

Turners birthday, 23 April, was also Shakespeares, the Prince Regents official birthday and St Georges Day.
In the massive installation Lightning with Stag in its Glare (1958-85), the suspended, bronze triangle embodies the energy of a powerful flash of lightning, which illuminates a group of half-formed creatures. The stag of the title was originally made from an ironing board and then cast in bright aluminium to suggest the glare of the lightning. The cart represents a goat, and the clods of bronze on the floor are primordial creatures. A small compass, mounted on top of a box, is another reference, with the lightning flash itself, to the natural energies of the earth.
As the title suggests, Steel Zinc Plain represents a territory or a space as much as an object. By placing it on the floor rather than on a plinth and allowing it to be walked across, Andre alters the viewers relationship to the work of art. Simple, geometric forms made from industrial materials are characteristic features of Andres sculptures.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
Constable rented a house at Hampstead for his family almost every summer between 1819 and 1826. In 1827, he moved there more permanently, whilst still keeping on his studio in London. In this way he combined the advantages of both locations. He wrote to his friend Fisher 'I am three miles from door to door - can have a message in an hour - & I can always get away from idle callers - and above all see nature - & unite a town & country life.'
Bevan was influenced by Walter Sickerts advice that artists should find subjects in everyday London life. This is one of his many pictures of horses. It shows a horse sale at Barbican, in Aldersgate in the city. The auctioneer stands in the decorated box in the background, surrounded by a large group of bidders. Horses were still common in London but the advent of the motor car had suggested that their days were numbered.The flat and textured colours of this work show the influence of the French Post-Impressionist artist Gauguin, whom Bevan met in Brittany in 1893.
This subject is taken from the fourteenth-century Italian love poetry that Fazio degli Uberti wrote to his Lady, Agniola of Verona. Rossetti had translated and published it in his Early Italian Poets in 1861. The woman is contemplating her beauty in a mirror as she plaits her hair, inviting admiring looks from both her suitor, Uberti, and contemporary viewers. Rossettis lover Fanny Cornforth modelled for the picture.In its combination of warm colour, rich glazes and contrasting textures the painting shows the influence of Renaissance Venetian painters, particularly Titian whom Rossetti greatly admired.
Gorky was born in Armenia, but was forced to flee Turkish persecution, and in 1920 settled in the USA.  His early work was strongly influenced by Pablo Picasso and the European Surrealists. In the summer of 1942, Gorky spent three weeks in Connecticut making drawings from nature. He went on to produce a series of paintings that refer to natural forms. In this painting, amorphous shapes and drips of liquid paint suggest the fluidity of the waterfall.
This depicts a group of cottages at Neunen in Brabant. The cottages are similar to a group that appear in an oil painting known as 'Village at Sunset'. Van Gogh mentioned this and two other drawings in a letter to a friend, the painter van Rappard, as an example of his recent work. Of one of them, he said, 'I had to do it roughly and quickly for the time was rather short for catching the right effect of light and shade, and the tone of the scene, and Nature as it was at that very moment.' The wintry scene of this drawing relates it to a similar drawing described to van Rappard in a letter of March 1884.
Style was a lawyer involved in the Counter-Reformation religious movement and his portrait is full of symbolic elements. The emblem on the floor and its motto proclaim that the human heart cannot be satisfied by worldly matters, but burns for the spiritual life. Style therefore turns his back on the trappings of his earthly life, represented by his family arms set in the window, by his books and writings and by the small violin. Instead, he moves towards the Church, symbolised by a closed garden, beyond which lies a pagan wilderness, including a classical ruin.
Austrian artist VALIE EXPORT adopted her pseudonym in 1967 to reject the names of both her father and of her former husband and assume a sort of commercial brand identity. Her works  including films, photographs and performances  expanded the transgressive ideas of Viennese Actionism to include a feminist critique of the limits imposed on the individual based on their perceived gender. In the Identity Transfer series she assumes a distinctly unfeminine pose, at odds with her hair style and make-up, playing with the codes through which gender identity is traditionally conveyed.
In 1942 Piper was suddenly sent to Bath following three nights of bombing there. He worked while the buildings were still burning. Reviewing an exhibition of war art at the National Gallery in October 1941 Piper wrote, 'after a war the controlled emotional record of actual events - the record made at once from experience and in the heat of the moment - is the only one that counts'. The watercolours he made in Bath provided the occasion for making such a record. They are the first to achieve the theatrical lighting effects typical of his work.
One of Andres early carvings, Last Ladder was made by cutting a series of concave forms into a rough-hewn beam of wood that had been salvaged from a construction site. Andre intended his cutting to reveal the distinctive qualities of this raw material. He later said of this sculpture: the wood was better before I cut it than after. I did not improve it in any way.
In the late 1950s, Nevelson began to make reliefs by stacking wooden boxes and crates, each of which would contain an arrangement of found objects that she collected as she walked around the streets of New York City. Black Wall is an early example of this approach, filled with pieces of scrap timber, such as joinery offcuts and fragments of furniture. The disparate elements are unified by being painted black, a colour which Nevelson suggested will make any material look more distinguished.
In a 1924 lecture Gris described painting as a sort of flat, coloured architecture, a conception reflected in the structure of these three small gouaches made that year. Visual reflections and rhymes are abundant in all three works. The bulbous body of the carafe in Bowl of Fruit echoes both the apple in the centre and the circular rim of the glass on the right, while the geometrical edges of the fruit bowl itself seem to reverberate across the folds of the tablecloth. In Pipe and Domino the spots of the domino, the bowl of the pipe and the rim of the small dish constitute an expanding series of circles. In Still Life with Guitar, the echoing ovals of the mouth of the carafe and the opening of the guitar offset the linear patterns of the sheet music and guitar strings. In addition, a deliberate spatial contradiction allows the fruit to nestle in the curve of the guitar as if in a fruit bowl, creating a sensory link between vision, taste and sound.
Mediterrane was Kellys first purely abstract relief. He experimented with processes of chance to determine the colour combinations. I wanted to show how any colour goes with any other colour, he later commented. 
His use of relief reflected his desire to avoid the illusory representation of depth: When I want to do a painting with one colour overlapping another, it has to be a real overlap, not a depicted overlap... I no longer wanted to depict space, but to make a work that existed in literal space.
Casspirs Full of Love depicts a structure resembling a shelved box containing seven severed heads. It relates to the state of emergency in South Africa, under which security forces had the right to detain suspects without warrant or trial, leading to many state-sanctioned murders. The title was inspired by a mother who sent a radio message to her son in the army with casspirs full of love. A casspir is an armoured riot-control vehicle. The imagery in this print is echoed in Kentridges film Johannesburg, 2nd Greatest City after Paris in the adjacent gallery.
In the early 1960s, Hiltons art could be figurative or abstract but it always had an erotic charge. This is, perhaps, the most literal description of a situation in his art of that time. He once stated that there are situations, states of mind, moods, etc., which call for some artistic expression. He gave the source of the painting - my wife dancing on a verandah, we were having a quarrel. She was nude and angry at the time and she was dancing up and down shouting oi yoi yoi  but it is more universal than that.
Gabo's construction of a three-dimensional figure  is achieved through intersecting planes without  the structure having great mass: rather like  load-bearing metal 'H' beams which carry great  weight but themselves have little bulk. Gabo's  adoption of the stereometric system, in which  volume is indicated through being bisected rather  than surrounded, is thus structural and  descriptive. The relatively unarticulated neck and  chest areas of Gabo's earliest constructed heads  were radically addressed in the subsequent  constructed heads and torsos and 'Model for  Constructed Torso' marks the attempt to articulate  most of the figure in stereometric planes, and in  a cubist idiom.
Gallery label, September 2004
Rothenstein was a 19-year-old student in Paris when he produced this painting. The verse inscribed at the bottom right is a quotation from a poem by Robert Browning with the same title as the picture, suggesting a tryst followed by abandonment. Where the poem takes the mans point of view, the painting provides the perspective of the woman left behind.
Dine believes that tools provide a 'link with our past, the human past, the hand'. They feature in many of his works, and can be seen as a symbol of artistic creation. There is also an autobiographical resonance, as Dine's family owned a hardware store in Cincinnati. In these prints, the tools are presented as a series of discrete items, as if laid out for analysis and classification.
Gallery label, September 2004
Of the three Parsifal paintings displayed here,  this one most resembles a stage set, with a spear  occupying centre stage. It also includes a roll  call of the chief players in the Parsifal saga:  Guramet, the hero's father; Titurel, the ruler of  the Grail; Amfortas, Titurel's son; Klingsor, a  magician; and Kundry, a seductress. Parsifal's  name appears on the window in reverse as  'Fal-parsi'. It was Parsifal's task to recover the  spear from Klingsor so that peace could be  restored to the kingdom of the Grail. But Kiefer  is not entirely focused on the mythological past.  The inscribed names (upper left) of the Baader  Meinhof terrorist faction who disrupted the peace  of post-war Germany jolt the viewer into  contemporary history.
When this painting was made the area of Belsize belonged to the Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey. The Abbey can be seen on the horizon. Today Belsize Park is part of north-west London, but in 1696 it was a distant country retreat for affluent Londoners. The painting was probably commissioned by John Coggs, a London goldsmith and banker to act as a portrait of his house. The Antwerp-born painter Jan Siberechts arrived in London in the 1670s and was one of the leading landscape painters, specialising in birds-eye views of country estates.
Steer made many visits to Walberswick in Suffolk, where he had friends. He completed a number of paintings of the beach there that are among the most authentically Impressionist works produced in Britain. Here he captures the rich warmth of late afternoon sunlight but, unlike the French Impressionist Monet, he was just as interested in the figures as in their setting. Steer has reworked the dashed, broken colour of the paint surface extensively. The two girls were originally holding hands, and in their shadow they still are. This kind of picture was seen as uncompromisingly avant-garde. One critic in 1892 even described such works at the New English Art Club exhibition as 'evil'.
This painting is set in Cecil Court, a street  famous for its second-hand bookshops and a  favourite haunt of the artist. It is one of many  paintings made by Kitaj arising out of an  increasing awareness of his own Jewishness. He  wrote, 'I have a lot of experience of refugees  from Germany and that's how this painting came  about. My dad and grandmother ... just barely  escaped.' The work shows the artist reclining on a  sofa while figures from his life pop out of the  street behind him. Kitaj has explained that this  theatrical composition was inspired by the  peripatetic troupes of the Yiddisher Theatre in  Central Europe, which he had learned about from  his grandparents and from in the diaries of the  writer Franz Kafka.
Oiticica often worked in series, or bodies of works. The Metaesquema include over 350 small scale paintings on card. These compositions of opaque, monochrome, geometric forms, often in primary colours, were inspired by the abstract art of Piet Mondrian and Kasimir Malevich. In contrast to the rigorous order and structure of both European artists, however, Oiticica introduces elements of instability into his works. The forms appear to jostle and bump together as though they are moving.
These five figures represent the principal pieces in a game of chess: the King, Queen, Knight, Castle and Bishop. Rather than the elegant designs of traditional chessmen, these are grotesque hybrid figures. The knight has a horses head, while the Bishop (known in France as the Fool) resembles a hunchbacked jester. Richier used distorted animal and partly human figures to reflect the anxieties and despair of post-war Europe. It seems to me that in violent works there is just as much sensibility as in poetic ones, she said. There can be just as much wisdom in violence as in gentleness.
The Russian inscriptions suggest a launderette sign: Prache is part of the word for laundry, b.s. is an abbreviation for white wash, and BOT possibly part of the word rabota meaning work. The iron bears a monogram with the artists initials. This painting conveys the bustle of a commercial laundry but can also be seen as a coded commentary on Goncharovas relationship with her partner, fellow-artist Michel Larionov. The two sides of the work are divided between male (shirts, collars and cuffs) and female (lace, blouses, aprons) items of laundry.
As a depiction of labour, this picture is greatly idealised. The workers are spotlessly clean despite their drudgery. The church in the distance, and the farm manager on the horse to the right, serve as reminders of spiritual and social authority. Stubbss picture can be seen as a celebration of the order and nobility of rural life, in tune with the concern with efficiency shown by agricultural writers of the time like Arthur Young. Alternatively, you may think that his picture robs these workers of their individuality and denies the harsh realities of work for sentimental effect.
The combination of oval and elongated forms runs through Motherwells long series of Elegies to the Spanish Republic, of which this is a late example. Combining precise drawing and expressive gesture he fashioned a loose black structure that embodied the landscape, bravura and tragedy of Spain. The impetus came from Motherwells sympathy for the plight of Spain as a result of Francos long dictatorship. Another important source was Federico Garca Lorcas Lament for Ignacio Snchez Mejas, commemorating the death of a bullfighter.
This work comprises two overlaid sheets of plastic, separated by a white stretcher frame which is visible through the plastic. Small holes have been punched through the plastic at regular intervals. Italian artist Dadamaino wanted to open up the surface of the artwork, creating a three-dimensional spatial quality. She recalled: I found a semi-transparent material that is normally used for shower curtains which came closest to the idea of transparency. With a hand punch I perforated the sheets and then placed them on the frame. The warmth of my hand moved the holes, and this shift was the result of chance.Presented by
Twombly's depiction of summer combines vivid splashes of liquid yellow on white with passages of lyrical poetry that emerge only to disappear again under layers of paint. The text is drawn from a poem by the Greek poet George Seferis. Although the poem is difficult to decipher, references to youth and the passage of time can be picked out. The painting also includes references to the Latin poet Catullus and to the shores of Asia Minor. Baia di Gaeta, towards the top of the canvas, refers to Twombly's home in Italy.
In the 1990s, Salcedo made a series of sculptures by filling items of furniture with concrete. The resulting works suggest the violation of domestic space and the human body. Rather than an empty space waiting to be filled with worldly belongings or childish fantasies, the wardrobe becomes hermetically sealed and inaccessible. The configuration of armoire and chair is akin to that of a Piet, the traditional depiction of the Madonna holding the body of the dead Christ on her lap.
There was an enormous output of memorial sculpture in the early 1920s as every community sought to raise a memorial to the men and women they had lost in the First World War. These ranged from representations of traditionally heroic soldiers to simpler, more abstract forms that acknowledged, perhaps, the unspeakable qualities of the war. The most famous was the Cenotaph, designed by Edwin Lutyens, in Londons Whitehall. Jagger became one of the leading memorial sculptors. Here he shows a listening post in No Mans Land, where a soldier hides among the bodies of his dead comrades in order to listen to the enemy close by.
Richard Billingham says he is 'trying to make order out of chaos'. He was brought up on a council estate in Birmingham, and began taking photos of his family when he studied art at Sunderland University. This photo shows his father, Ray, a chronic alcoholic who rarely leaves the house.
Colquhoun wrote that the title of this work refers to the female monster who, according to the ancient legend in Homers Odyssey, inhabited narrow straits and devoured passing sailors. Yet there is also strong sexual and feminine symbolism at play in this work. As Colquhoun explained, It was suggested by what I could see of myself in a bathit is thus a pictorial pun, or double-image. Produced during Colquhouns transition from magical realism to surrealism, this painting is one of her most introspective.
This group portrait of the banker and merchant, George Bridges, with his wife Mary and their eight children, is one of the largest portraits ever produced by Constable. The group is shown in what was probably the drawing-room of Lawford Place, Essex, which Bridges had built about 1790. Lawford church can be seen through the window. In 1912 D S MacColl, a former Tate Director, reported that, Constable showed an admiration for one of his sitters, the lady at the spinet or early pianoforte, and that his visits were in consequence discouraged.
This was painted in the summer of 1911 as part of a decorative scheme for the dining room at the Borough Polytechnic, at the Elephant and Castle, London.  The theme of the rooms decoration was London on Holiday, and Grant responded by painting this idealised panorama of seven male nudes bathing. The nudes also represented the continuous movement of a single figure.  Their bodies, like the water, are stylised to heighten the decorative effect of the image.  Grants depiction of the male body was greatly influenced by Michelangelos ink studies and in particular his cartoon Battle of Cascina.  The celebration of the male nude was underpinned by both artists by a personal homoerotic fascination.
Leaman is a great admirer of detailed narrative paintings from the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries, and like those works his own is  crammed with meaning and incident, both emotional and spiritual. The title of this painting refers to The Fat and the Lean Kitchen by the Dutch artist Jan Steen, a work which depicts a riotous and debauched domestic gathering painted to warn against the dangers of excess and immorality. Leaman uses his family and friends as models and here has placed them in a kitchen reacting to  menacing events. There is also Christian imagery present on the table, from the discarded lily to the spilt red wine. The entire scene is steeped in a yellow light which reinforces its mysterious atmosphere.
Vasarely was one of the first artists to propose an explicitly optical style of painting, inspired by geometric abstraction and cubisms distortions of space and perspective. He believed that the illusion of movement in two dimensions was a kind of physical motion in its own right. The black and white paintings which he made in the 1950s grew out of his experiments with transparent screens painted with geometric patterns and layered in order to produce high-contrast images that appeared to move with the viewer.
In 1880 Rodin was commissioned to make a portal and set of monumental doors for the Muse des arts dcoratifs in Paris. This work, known as 'The Gates of Hell', included a large number of figures in relief. These inspired several individual works, including this caryatid. An early version of this sculpture was exhibited in 1886. Three years later one critic wrote, 'this supple little creature, not more that eighteen inches high, is regarded by the sculptor and his friends as one of his very best compositions, and many copies of it have been made for the latter in both marble and bronze'. This particular bronze was made in 1950 from a plaster cast.
The worst of the London Blitz was centred on the East End, and this painting shows a street in the Silvertown area, close to the docks. The area was devastated and Sutherland found it tremendously moving... mysterious and sad. Though the houses were mostly abandoned, a few people continued to shelter in the wreckage during a period of social unrest. However, figures do not appear in these paintings, the massive loss of life and abiding pathos being suggested by the stillness of the scene and its melancholy colouring.
Gallery label, September 2004
Kitaj was born in America but studied at the Royal College of Art in London between 1959 and 1962, with other artists who would become associated with pop. Much of his work is autobiographical. To Kitaj, each of these faces represented a different woman he had known fleetingly. The sources of his imagery also reflect his fusion of abstract art and other forms of representation. The heads in profile were suggested by doodles made by the 16th-century humanist Erasmus. Kitaj has combined them with a figure style derived from Willem de Koonings nudes of the late 1940s.
The title of this painting refers to Lord Byrons long, epic poem Childe Harolds Pilgrimage (Childe is an archaic title for the son of a nobleman). Byron saw  the remnants  of Italys past as profoundly poignant: the country had, in the intervening years, lost both its liberty and integrity, but was still breathtakingly beautfiul. Turner showed his painting with these lines from Byrons poem:
The title of this large scale, multi-part drawing translates as into infinity or ad infinitum. Each sheet contains the image of ribbons that weave around each other and flow diagonally across the page. Suggestive of blood-filled arteries, umbilical cords, rivers, threads or tubes, the drawings remind us of the basic elements of life and its complex journey through time.
Lucia Moholy moved to Dessau to accompany her husband Lszl Moholy-Nagy (18951946) when he began teaching at the Bauhaus school of art, architecture and design. There she produced many iconic photographs documenting the architecture of the Bauhaus buildings in the mid-1920s.
In the early 1830s Turner was a regular visitor to Petworth, the Sussex house of his patron Lord Egremont. The house contained a fine collection of old master and contemporary British paintings, and many artists were entertained there. Turner used the Old Library as a studio. As well as painting the estate, he made many drawings of the house and its inhabitants and guests. The death of Egremont in 1837, and that of his other great friend and patron Walter Fawkes in 1825, increased Turner's social isolation in his later years.
This was one of three panels painted by Rossetti to decorate the upper part of a settle belonging to William Morris. The subject for all three was Dantes La Vita Nuova which Rossetti translated for his own publication, The Early Italian Poets 1861. Rossetti was fascinated by Dantes story and saw in it a parallel with his own love for Elizabeth Siddall. Dantis Amor (Dantes Love) is the central panel, symbolising Beatrices death, which occurred between the events depicted in the other two panels, The Salutation of Beatrice in Florence and The Salutation in the Garden of Eden.
Stirred by the spirituality and yearning in Mendelssohns song Ruhetal, here Millaiss theme is death, signified by the presence of the grave, skull and funerary wreaths, and in the intense and solemn colours of a graveyard touched with the last rays of a setting sun. Viewers are invited to contemplate their own mortality through the preparation of the new grave in the foreground and the nun who gazes out towards them. Despite the pain and sadness in death, the title offers hope that it will bring repose from lifes cares and an infinite contentment.
The couple represented here appear to merge into each other. As in many of Bourgeoiss works, male and female are combined in an ambiguous arrangement of body parts. For Bourgeois, hanging indicates a state of uncertainty. Horizontality is a desire to give up, to sleep, she said. Verticality is an attempt to escape. Hanging and floating are states of ambivalence.
An imaginative reconstruction of the Vorticist artists at the Restaurant de la Tour Eiffel, 1 Percy Street, London. It features, from left to right, seated: Cuthbert Hamilton, Ezra Pound, William Roberts, Wyndham Lewis, Frederick Etchells and Edward Wadsworth. Standing in the doorway are Jessica Dismorr and Helen Saunders. Joe, the waiter, and Rudolph Stulik, the proprietor of the restaurant from 1908-1937, are on the right. Etchells is holding volume I of the Vorticist publication 'Blast'. In the late 1950s, Roberts commented on the evenings at the restaurant in 'The Listener' (21 March 1957): 'In my memory la cuisine franaise [French cooking] and Vorticism are indissolubly linked.'
Here Turner has used Baiae, in the Bay of Naples, as the backdrop for the myth of Apollo and the Cumaean Sibyl. The latter asked the Roman god to grant her life for as many years as the grains of sand she could hold in her hand. However, she omitted to ask for eternal youth and wasted away until only her voice remained. The poignant theme of her story is reflected in Turners landscape. The passage of time has wrought changes to the Roman architecture of the resort, but the golden beauty of the landscape remains undiminished.
Hofmann was born in Bavaria and trained in Munich  and Paris. In 1930 he emigrated to America and  eventually settled in New York. In 1934 he opened  an art school there which he maintained until  1958. Hofmann was a highly respected teacher. The  degree of contact he had with European artists was  rare among contemporary Americans. Hofmann's own  art flowered after he closed down his school. His  late paintings are characterised by the  juxtaposition of strongly coloured rectangles.  These created the feeling of space because the  human eye sees different colours as being at  different distances from it. Hofmann termed this  effect 'push and pull'. The paintings were often  worked out by pinning rectangles of coloured paper  to the canvas.
Mammon, the god of money, is represented as a tyrant on a throne. He nurses money bags in his lap and two youths are crushed by his monstrous power. This is one of a series of paintings in which George Frederick Watts criticised modern commerce and its de-humanising effect on the nation.Watts subtitled the picture Dedicated to his Worshippers, as if inscribing a monument. He apparently had plans to commission a sculpture of Mammon for Hyde Park where he hoped the gods followers would be at least honest enough to bow the knee publicly to him.
The features of this pink-faced man were originally made up of collaged elements including string, measuring tape and curtain rings. Some years later, Picabia ripped these off, an action which also removed areas of paint, leaving patches of bare canvas visible. During the second phase of work, Picabia added combs for the hair, and painted in the head and hands of a woman. These dramatic alterations reflect Picabias humorous and irreverent approach to picture-making.
Spencer visited Port Glasgow in 1940 to fulfil a commission to paint its shipyards and was attracted by the cemetery there. He planned a vast shaped canvas fifty feet wide which would portray the Last Judgement and Resurrection taking place in this cemetery. This painting is the central section from the project and shows Glaswegians climbing out of their graves and greeting one another, as well as raising their hands in ecstatic gratitude.
In 1968 Picasso made a series of 347 prints in a period of just seven months. Although he had made many etchings before, notably those published collectively as the 'Vollard Suite', he had never worked quite so intensively on a print project. The size of the series was not predetermined. The prints do not tell a story but are a group of images which collectively depicts the fantasies of an artist in old age. Aware of his declining sexual potency, Picasso cast himself in the role of a voyeur. The series encouraged a widespread revival of interest in etching among contemporary artists.
Sherman presents herself as an actress in imaginary film scenes. These characters were derived from the plethora of images absorbed from film, TV, advertisements and magazines, as well as real acquaintances who served as role models in Shermans youth. Detached from any real scenario, Shermans Film Stills invite the viewer to construct their own narratives around the image.
Gallery label, August 2004
Kiefer travelled in China in 1993, and some years later made a series of paintings based on photographs taken there. The title refers to a 1957 speech in which Mao encouraged greater freedom of expression, declaring Let a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of thought contend. This freedom was short-lived, as the intellectuals who criticised Mao were swiftly arrested. Kiefer portrays a statue of Mao partially obscured by dried roses and tangled brambles symbolising the profusion and withering of revolutionary dreams.
'E.O.W.' - Estella (Stella) West - was a principal model for Auerbach's nudes and female heads until 1973. She began posing regularly for Auerbach in the early 1950s and by 1959 was the subject of over thirty paintings and drawings. This painting is one of three versions which Auerbach worked on between May 1957 and April 1958. The paint's thickness is the result of hundreds of sittings governed by Auerbach's principle that 'Nothing can be left out ... you have to bury the irrelevent in painting somehow'. The way the image seems buried in a dense accretion of paint thus records Auerbach's quest to find a visual equivalent for his 'raw experience' of the sitter.
The bare metal bars of this childs cot resemble those of a prison cell, while the springs have been replaced by taut cheese wires. Hatoum has transformed a symbol of comfort and care into a claustrophobic space suggesting a place of incarceration and torture. The sculpture evokes themes of child abuse, as well as the suffering experienced by political prisoners.
In this painting the light in the sky and on the sea dazzles the viewer, obscuring the scene. This visual effect echoes the progress of Turners own work on the painting as he returned to areas of the canvas over a period of several years, covering the original subject. Dark shapes that appear through the layers suggest boats, while the buildings on the left have not been definitively identified but may represent Venice. By reworking the canvas, Turner has created less tangible subjects  those of light and colour themselves.
Paintings about trials, sentencing and courtroom incidents were extremely popular during the Victorian period. Solomon sets the scene in a darkened room. The familys hopelessness is evident from the gentleman with his head in his hands and the womans angst-ridden expression. A sense of suspense is suggested by the woman who looks over her shoulder anxiously as the door of the courtroom opens. Despite the gloomy subject matter, both this picture and the sequel, Not Guilty (also on display here), were well received. Prints reproducing them sold well across the country.
This illustrates lines from St Luke's Gospel, although the inclusion of the sleeping disciples also refers to the Gospels of Matthew and Mark. Christ is shown praying in the Garden of Gethsemene just before his betrayal by Judas and his arrest:
Woman with a Bag was completed shortly before Schmidt-Rottluff left for military service on the Russian front in autumn 1915. Its first owner felt that the dark colours and tragic expression of the portrait were a response to the misery of wartime. The womans face is elongated, with extended cheeks and nose, in the manner of West African masks. By contrast, her clothes and accessories are those of a fashionable European.
Gallery label, September 2004
In this series Sherman radically alters her appearance using make-up, hairstyles, hats and different facial expressions. She has explained, I made [them] to show the process of turning one character into another. At that time I was merely interested in the use of make-up on a face as paint used on a blank canvas. Shermans self-transformation, combining evident staging with the successful portrayal of a character type, continues to be central to her work today.
Gallery label, September 2004
This is a rare example of Bacons pre-war painting. Although rather awkward in handling it demonstrates several features of his later work. The claustrophobic space is the setting for an obscure narrative, involving a dog-like creature and a robotic figure with a gaping mouth which screams in anger or pain. It was made around the time of the International Surrealist Exhibition in London in 1936, for which his work was, surprisingly, rejected as insufficiently surreal.
Gallery label, September 2004
Sahara Circle was made by Long during a walk through the Hoggar region of the Sahara in southern Algeria. He arranged a ring of rocks around a circular area that he had cleared within a patch of broken stones. I think circles have belonged in some way or other to all people at all times,Long has said. They are universal and timeless, like the image of a human hand. For me, that is part of their emotional power, although there is nothing symbolic or mystical in my work.
This view was painted from the bridge at Angles sur lAnglin near Poitiers in France.  Fry had discovered the painting of Paul Czanne in 1906, the year of Czannes death, and had built an aesthetic theory largely based on the way Czanne constructed his pictures.  The style of this painting is like Czanne in the suppression of detail, and in the organisation of the colouring into clear masses.  The shapes are deliberately made to look solid, even the clouds and the banks of reeds in the river.
In the mid-1960s Freud embarked on a series of  paintings of botanical subjects, an interest that  was anticipated in an earlier painting, 'Interior  in Paddington' 1951. 'Two Plants' is rendered with  meticulous precision and is perhaps Freud's most  ambitious and most resolved expression of this  theme. He began the painting in 1977 and it took  three years to complete. Freud recalls that it  provided a means of accustoming himself to the  light of a new studio. He describes it as 'lots of  little portraits of leaves', adding 'I wanted it  to have a really biological feeling of things  growing and fading and leaves coming up and others  dying'.
The title of this work suggests that beneath the cowskin veil is a statue of 

the Virgin Mary. The cow's udders have been arranged around the statue's head to suggest a sort of crown. The satin 

train was made from a wedding dress belonging to the artist's grandmother.
After studying in Italy, Thomas Gotch painted works on the theme of motherhood and childhood. Here the jewel-like colours and gold background recall early Christian altarpieces. Sing praises to God, sing praises: Sing praises unto our King, Sing praises, For God is King of all the earth: Sing praises with understanding, from Psalm xlvii: 6 and 7, is inscribed in Latin along the top. Gotch was a founding member of the Royal Colonial Society of British Artists and the array of clothing may have been intended to communicate the universality of worship, but the painting follows European tradition in representing the angelic singers as pale skinned.
Zero to Infinity originally consisted of an arrangement of one hundred latticed cubes, arranged in a square. Viewers were invited to interact with the work, freely moving the components into new configurations. For the artist, this act of breaking the symmetry of the cubes through public participation was a significant departure from minimalist practice, and an essential element of the work. A partial display of twenty-five cubes is shown here. For conservation reasons, they cannot be touched. Instead, they are accompanied by a series of images showing the cubes being rearranged in different ways.
This wall-mounted sculpture was based on a painting made two years earlier, entitled 'Varoom'. The source image for both works was an illustration in a popular boys' comic that focused on the Second World War. Like all of Lichtenstein's work this sculpture is ironic. The steel mesh suggests cloud, but it also alludes to the Benday dots used in the printing of comics and newspapers. However, the sculpture has no relation to that process and, indeed, the dots were barely visible in the original illustration. Made at a time when the USA was heavily involved in the Vietnam War, this sculpture can be seen as anaesthetising violence, turning a destructive explosion into a simplified icon of beauty.
Camnitzers Leftovers reflects a period of political turmoil and violent repression in Latin America. The installation is made up of individually bandaged boxes, stained with red paint and with the word Leftovers stencilled on them. The implication is that they contain human remains. Uruguay, the country in which Camnitzer spent his formative years, descended into chaos during the late 1960s. A wave of labour disputes prompted the President Jorge Pacheco to declare a state of emergency and impose martial law. Demonstrations were brutally suppressed, and political dissidents were arrested and often tortured.
It has recently been realised that a number of Elizabethan and Jacobean portraits unmistakably show women as pregnant. The Flemish-born but London-raised Gheeraerts produced various portraits of this type. This example was acquired by Tate in 2001. Although the identity of the sitter is unknown, her sumptuous costume, with numerous pearls, indicates her high status. Pearls also symbolised purity, appropriate in a chaste wife. It is unusual for a sitter at this period to be shown smiling, but there are other examples in Gheeraerts's work.
This work is related to a mathematical model in  the Institut Poincar, Paris, representing an  'oscillating developable of a cubic ellipse'. This  model had been shown in May 1936 in the Exposition  Surraliste d'Objets at the Galerie Ratton. Like  the Surrealists, Gabo was struck by the lyrical,  sometimes fanciful nature of these geometrical  models. He later said that he aimed in this work -  one of a series on the theme - to 'take this  complicated formula and change its realisation to  prove that what was basically a fantasy (the  intuition of the mathematician) could be seen  through the intuition of an artist'.
Poliakoff was born in Russia but left in 1919, becoming a travelling musician. He settled in Paris some years later. Although he began painting in the 1930s he was not able to give up his musical profession for painting until 1952. Poliakoff's technique of dividing the canvas into coloured interlocking planes owes much to Cubism.
This painting illustrates a passage from the Bible describing one of the plagues inflicted on the Egyptians as divine punishment for enslaving the Jewish people: the killing of all the first-born sons of the Egyptians.  It is uncomfortably crowded by threatening atmospheric effects, emphasising the power of forces beyond mankinds control.

Turner exhibited the picture just a couple of months after being admitted as a full member of the Royal Academy, and clearly intended viewers to recognise his skills in the highest branch of painting  the historical grand style  claiming for himself the mantle of earlier artists like Poussin
This painting is an allegorical representation of the life of an artist. It is a completely invented scene, bearing no resemblance to the solitariness of Derains true working conditions. He has portrayed himself surrounded by members of his family, who can be seen as modern muses. His wife reads a book, a reference to the artists literary interests. His niece holds a dog, a symbol of her fidelity to the artist. His sister-in-law brings refreshments in the manner of a maidservant in a seventeenth-century painting. The animals and fruit also symbolise aspects of the calling of an artist.
Vietnam II belongs to a series of three massive paintings that Golub made in protest against the Vietnam War. He had opposed the war since the 1960s but avoided representing it directly in his work, preferring to explore the themes of masculinity and power in a more universal manner. He changed his mind after the 1972 presidential election, in which the anti-war Senator George McGovern was heavily defeated by Richard Nixon. Golub used news photographs and his own experience as a veteran of the Second World War in order to build an allegory of the disconnection generated by conflict. Vietnam II sets American soldiers and their armoured car across a telling central gulf from Vietnamese civilian victims. The contrast between ruthless organisation and panicked disintegration find an echo in the apparently fragmentary nature of the work itself.
Many of Gustons paintings have a disturbing quality, featuring abject or grotesque objects. In Monument, legs are grouped in a tangle to form a looming edifice. Guston, who was Jewish, had been deeply affected by film of the Nazi concentration camps, which may have influenced the imagery of disembodied limbs in his work. In 1973, he wrote: Our whole lives (since I can remember) are made up of the most extreme cruelties of holocausts. We are the witnesses of the hell.
In the 1940s Dubuffet became interested in work made by untrained artists, children and the mentally ill. He believed that such art, which he called Art Brut (Raw Art), was free from the cultural conventions governing fine art, and reflected the true dynamics of the human mind. Dubuffet particularly admired graffiti and the surface of Large Black Landscape, which was built up of layers of paint into which lines were scraped and gouged, is reminiscent of an aged, crumbling, graffiti-covered wall.
Belcher became bare-knuckle champion in 1800 when he beat Andrew Gamble in five rounds on Wimbledon Common. After defending the title for three years he lost an eye in an accident when playing at rackets and went into semi-retirement, keeping the Jolly Brewers tavern in Wardour Street. Marshall depicts him wearing a 'belcher', a kind of spotted neckerchief named after the boxer. Accompanying him is the bull-terrier Trusty given him by his patron Lord Camelford.
Exhibited in Turner's Gallery in 1809 together  with other views of the Thames. Blythe Sands  are off Sheerness, facing Canvey Island. Correspondence suggests that Turner offered  the picture to his patron Sir John Leicester late  in 1810, and is also said to have refused to sell  it to Sir George Beaumont, who generally disliked his work. In later years the canvas was apparently used in Turner's house as a cat flap.
Pinot Gallizio was an early member of the Situationist International, an avant-garde group that attempted to analyse and subvert the capitalist commodification of daily life. Gallizios industrial painting adapted mechanised manufacturing techniques to challenge established models for the production and distribution of art. The paint was applied onto long rolls of canvas by a team of assistants using a low-tech painting machine, so that the result was mass-produced but also unique. Gallizio would then cut off sections to be sold.
Fagan was an Irishman who worked in Rome, where he married Anna Maria Ferri in 1790. She was seventeen, and was to live only another ten years. This, one of Fagan's earliest recorded works, may have been painted to celebrate the marriage: it presents the young Italian girl as a stylish but rather mysterious siren, having some of the modish allure of Fuseli's fascinating ladies of about the same date - see his drawing 'The Debutante' displayed here.
Lely's debt to van Dyck's work is evident in the seated three-quarter-length composition, the rich billowing curtain and the stone window opening to the left. While the identity of the sitter is uncertain, her bared breast suggests that she is some powerful man's mistress rather than a lady of impeccable virtue. Her left hand rests on a golden object, perhaps the jar that symbolises the reformed biblical sinner Mary Magdalene. Her other hand quietens an attentive spaniel, a breed often identified with the Stuart royal family.The inscription on the ledge, 'Dutchess of Cleveland', was probably added a century later.
Kokoschka spent his first months in England in  1939 as a refugee in Hampstead, but around the end  of July he moved to Polperro in Cornwall, where he  lived on a house on a cliff overlooking the sea.  Unfortunately war broke out shortly after his  arrival and, for security reasons, painting in the  open air was forbidden. This picture was painted  inside his house and shows the view from a window.  The artist has written on the back '30 years of an  emigrant's artistic wisdom. An artist's signature  remains - but leaders of states bloom & fall.'
Demolished captures the destruction of tower blocks in three different housing estates in Hackney, east London, between 1993 and 1995. According to Whiteread, this work is something that is going to be completely forgotten... the detritus of our culture. Whiteread was particularly concerned by the social and economic changes introduced by the Conservative party in the 1980s and their impact on homeless people in London. This work operates as a metaphor for neglect and disappearance, commemorating what no longer exists.
In Marilyn Monroe, Warhol found a fusion of two of his consistent themes: death and the cult of celebrity. The star died tragically in August 1962. 

In the following two years, Warhol made thirty silkscreen paintings of her, always using the same publicity photograph from the 1953 film Niagara. This set of ten screenprints was produced in 1967, in an edition of 250. The repeated image serves as the basis for a series of startling colour transformations.
These maquettes, or preparatory models, were made during the mid-1940s, when Moore was working on a commission 

for a sculpture for a progressive school 

for children and parents. The theme 

of the family was particularly relevant.
Sanja Ivekovics early video works examine the pressures imposed upon women to conform to conventional notions of beauty and explore the feminist contention that the private is the political. Ivekovic was the first artist in Croatia to identify herself as a feminist, describing this as a gesture of disobedience toward the communist regime that treated feminism as a bourgeois import from the West. Ivekovic graduated from art school in 1971, during the period known as the Croatian Spring, when many Croatian artists rejected the dominance of official, state-sanctioned art.
Paul Nash was deeply affected by his experiences as a soldier and an artist during the First World War. This picture was based around the mystical association of two objects which inhabit different elements and have no apparent relationin life... The pale stone sphere on top of a ruined pillar faces its counterpart the moon, cold and pale and solid as stone.Though not explicitly about mourning, the deep, unpopulated space and ghostly lighting gives the scene a melancholy air. Rather than depict a real landscape, Nash said that his intention had been to call up memories and stir emotions in the spectator.
Duchamp-Villon was an expert horseman, serving as an auxiliary doctor in a cavalry regiment during the war. This sculpture developed from his studies of a leaping horse and rider to become an abstract evocation of dynamic energy and power. His work has been compared to that of the Futurists in the way it aims to capture a sense of motion. The tension between the mechanistic and the natural world echoes that between solid bronze and the representation of movement.
This painting was bought as a result of the Courtauld Fund. In January 1924 the wealthy textile manufacturer Samuel Courtauld gave the large sum of 50,000 to create a trust for buying Impressionist and Post-Impressionist works for the Tate Gallery. Between 1924 and 1927 the Trust bought nineteen paintings by artists such as Edouard Manet, Paul Gauguin, Auguste Renoir, Claude Monet and Paul Czanne. This donation transformed the Tates Collection of modern art by non-British artists. This significant painting was acquired only a year after it was made, and was the first work by Bonnard to enter the Tate Collection.
In the late 1990s, Riley began to make large-scale paintings in which curved blocks of colour are positioned using an underlying grid of verticals and diagonals, creating a sense of joyous movement. When played through a series of arabesques the curve is wonderfully fluid, supple and strong, she has said. It can twist and bend, flow and sway, sometimes with the diagonal, sometimes against, so that the tempo is either accelerated or held back, delayed. The title Evo was a cry associated with the intoxicated rites of the Greek god Bacchus.
Flavin had a special admiration for the Russian artist Vladimir Tatlins proposed design for the Monument to the Third International, a revolving spiral that would have been taller than the Eiffel Tower. Like all Flavins sculptures, this work was made using pre-fabricated fluorescent tubes. He described it as a monument partly as a joke, aware of the disparity between its modest materials and the traditional grandeur of monumental sculpture.
Nevelson worked on this assemblage over a number of years, continually recomposing the found objects within it. When she donated it to the Tate Gallery, her dealer described it as one of her favourite works, adding: Mrs. Nevelson does, in fact, feel that this particular work is especially appropriate for your monarchial country. Its cathedral-like aspect, which seems to present the viewer with an altar at which to kneel, perhaps to receive some royal blessing, and its gilded splendor  were considered peculiarly appropriate.
Gallery label, September 2004
This picture shows a ship that has lost one of its sails, and is being swamped by a storm. The crew desperately pump water out of the hull. Tuke painted this scene aboard an old French brig anchored in Falmouth Harbour. He had lived in Falmouth as a boy, but in 1885 decided to leave London to settle there permanently encouraged by the Newlyn School of open-air painters. In Cornwall he focused on painting the male nude in the open air but also produced marine subjects like this.
This image relates to a plan for a sculpture, which Bellmer never completed. The peg-top was intended to symbolise a woman turning the heads and hearts of men. Bellmer was interested in ideas of fetishism, drawing out sexual associations between inert objects and the body. His best-known works were a series of constructed dolls. Bellmer joined the French surrealist group in 1938, having left his native Germany to escape the Nazi regime.
Much of Hirsts early work was concerned with mortality. Here, he has arranged a selection of ornate shells, purchased in Thailand, inside a glass cabinet resembling a museum display case and therefore alluding to the 19th-century tradition of collecting and classifying natural specimens. He hascommented that you kill things to look at them and in Forms Without Life he has made it clear that such an approach involves removing plants and animals from their natural habitat, killing them in order to preserve them as a beautiful display.
The Cuban artist Wifredo Lam trained in Havana before moving to Europe where, in 1939, he joined the Surrealist movement. When the Second World War broke out he returned to Cuba (crossing the Atlantic with Andr and Jacqueline Breton) and seized the opportunity to re-examine his cultural roots. His paintings were populated with spiritual figures in sacred jungle settings. He later recalled that Ibaye is a word used in Voodoo, probably the name of an important mystical figure. Lam created a new art for the New World from the combination of indigenous Caribbean and West African influences.
In each of the four paintings shown here, a different range of colours registers the changing light and temperature of the seasons. In this work, representing spring, a resurgence of energy after winter is depicted in a vertical arrangement of red curves and splashes of yellow. The curves relate to traditional Egyptian boats, which appear in a number of Twomblys works, including a sculpture in this display. Primavera, the Italian word for spring, appears alongside passages of text that evoke happiness and hope.
This picture of 1948 was based on a pencil drawing of 1927 and was made as true to the drawing as possible. A distinctive characteristic of Lowry's work is his use of a white background and the elimination of shadows which gives his pictures a naive and dreamlike quality. He started using pure flake white as a base for his paintings in the 1920s. This was a result of an argument with his teacher Bernard D. Taylor, who thought Lowry's pictures were too dark. Lowry later discovered, to his pleasure, that the flake white turned creamy grey-white over the years.
This is a preliminary sketch for the ceiling of the newly-built Banqueting House at Whitehall Palace. Rubens was in London as a diplomatic envoy of Philip IV of Spain and was commissioned by Charles I to paint scenes celebrating his father James Is peaceful and prosperous reign. In the centre James is seated on a globe being lifted up to heaven by Jupiters eagle, guided by the figure of Justice, to be crowned by Minerva (goddess of Wisdom) and Victory. Allegorical sketches representing the late kings virtues surround this, with a procession of putti and animals above and below.
Dals disturbing, imaginary landscapes often contain references to his own life. Forgotten Horizon is a typical example, drawing upon memories of childhood holidays on the beach at Rosas on the Costa Brava. The striding woman in the distance is his cousin, Carolinetta, while the dancing figures in the foreground were inspired by a picture on a postcard. Dal intended the effect to be hallucinatory, with the figures appearing as if projected onto a prepared background or theatrical set.
This construction belongs to a small group of works of the 1930s that are among Gabos finest. It is based on the juxtaposition of organic, sweeping planes which demonstrate the properties of transparency and flexibility in Perspex, and a precise, crystalline centre. These elements embody contrasting energies held in counterpoise: flowing momentum and internal, cell-like division. A photograph of this work, taken by Barbara Hepworth during the Second World War, shows it against the background of the sea at Carbis Bay, Cornwall, where Gabo was living at the time.
Nicholson was at the centre of the London-based British avant-garde. Shortly before the war he moved to Cornwall with his wife Barbara Hepworth and their children. To earn a living he abandoned his white reliefs of the 1930s and returned to painting landscapes, which his dealers Alex Reid & Lefevre considered easier to sell. Landscapes, particularly those of British scenes, became popular during the war. This view of the harbour at St Ives is one of a series begun in 1939. They enabled Nicholson to develop ideas of the previous decade, particularly his experimentation with the positioning of objects in space. He added the Union Jack in the foreground as a gesture to celebrate V.E. Day and the end of the war.
Gallery label, September 2004
In 1945 Nicholson returned to the subject of  table-top still lifes, producing a series of works  in which the foreground objects and background are  compressed. In this picture the combination of  subtle shades and tones with more vivid white and  scarlet, is typical of the range of colours he  favoured in the early post-war period. The colour  contrasts are used to help define the individual  shapes of the densely-grouped still life objects,  within the overall very abstract composition.
During the late 1970s and early 1980s Sherman made a large number of Untitled Film Stills. These works are not directly derived from moving images but are single exposure photographs that borrow cinematic techniques, including lighting, scenery, and framing. Sherman herself is the model for each one. By masquerading in a series of conventional female cinema roles such as the lover or the young housewife, as if a character in a melodrama, she draws attention to the way that Hollywood cinema has contributed to stereotypes about women.
This is Constables last treatment of one of his favourite Hampstead subjects. To the usual ingredients of his Branch Hill Pond composition, this time he added a windmill that never existed there, and also a double rainbow. Rainbows are often included in Constables late work, either for symbolic reasons or for their associated physical properties. He admired the way Rubens, when painting a rainbow, could combine dewy light and freshness, the departing shower, with the exhilaration of the returning sun.
Cindy Sherman''s Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artist''s earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
This mantelpiece was in Vanessa Bells house at 46 Gordon Square in London.  The objects on it include handmade paper flowers from the Omega Workshops.  The low viewpoint suggests that Bell painted this picture sitting down.

The fractured and abstracted forms and highly keyed colours show that Bell was familiar with recent developments in France, including Fauvism and Cubism.
Gallery label, August 2004
John Gibson was one of the most widely-regarded neoclassical sculptors in Europe. In this statue group he depicts the moment in Greek myth when Hylas, the boy companion of Hercules, was abducted by water-nymphs who were entranced by his beauty. Hylas is simultaneously admired and restrained by the two Naiades. Gibsons treatment of the scene draws on many classical sources, and the marble is inscribed (in Greek) with the words Beautiful Hylas. The statue was bought by Robert Vernon, a successful businessman and patron of the arts, and subsequently given to the nation.
Many of Grahams works reflect on socio-political issues. In contrast, his Television Portraits are surprisingly intimate and domestic. The series began with a spontaneous photograph of the artists flatmate, and extended to include images of people watching television all over the world. Although they meditate on the power of mass media and the ubiquity of television, the television is not visible in any of the photographs.
Tpies developed a style that involved covering his canvases with a thick, highly textured base and incorporating into it materials such as clay and marble dust. To this, he added incised and scribbled lines, various lacerations and graffiti-like marks. He was fascinated by the contrast of different materials. He later wrote: 'My pictures became the truly experimental fields of battle... destruction led up to aesthetic tranquility.'
This work explores how masculinity and fashion can be determined by a technological environment - here signalled by the glamour of the space race, typified by John F Kennedys 1961 exhoratation to go to the moon. Hamiltons investigation of the languages of advertising and popular culture through painting and collage has a critical and analytical intention as much as a poetic force. He understood that the artist in twentieth-century urban life is inevitably a consumer of mass culture and potentially a contributor to it.
In the early 1930s, Bellmer created an almost life-sized figure of a young girl, which Andr Breton and Paul Eluard described as the first and only Surrealist object with a universal, provocative power. He recreated the doll in a variety of forms. This version makes the element of sexual fantasy explicit by reducing her to two sets of hips. It also derives from Bellmers desire to maximise the articulation of this substitute body/object through the use of ball joints. Indeed, this work was originally known as Ball Joint, and was exhibited in the 1936 Surrealist exhibition of objects held in Paris.
In this work the outline of the figure is roughly gouged into the thick paint, the face and body scarred and crumpled. The title identifies it as a caricature of the poet-painter Henri Michaux, whose writings featured Monsieur Plume, a semi-autobiographical comic character. It belongs to a group of unconventional portraits of Dubuffets artistic and literary friends. The series was exhibited under the title Portraits with extracted Likeness, with Likeness cooked and confected in the Memory, with Likeness exploded in the Memory of Mr Jean Dubuffet.
Mytens was born and trained in the Netherlands and from 1618 he worked in England. Compared with local artists, he offered a striking naturalism. Hamilton shared an interest in art-collecting with the future Charles I, whom Mytens painted in a similar pose. In 1623, the date of this picture, Hamilton had attended the Prince in Madrid during Charless unsuccessful attempt to marry a Spanish princess. There they saw portraits by the young Velasquez. Years later, during the Civil War, the royalist Hamilton was beheaded shortly after Charles himself.
Since the 1960s Long has based his art on the action of walking in the natural landscape. He later extended this practice to creating sculptures using materials found in these landscapes, whether at the site itself or in the gallery. A Line in the Himalayas is one of several works that resulted from a walk in the Nepalese Himalayas that Long made in 1975. The photograph records a line of white stones arranged by the artist, which stretch towards the mountain peaks in the distance.
By the time Modigliani painted this portrait he had developed his distinctive style of representing the figure. This womans elongated neck and stylised features embody his personal vision of beauty. It derives from his interest in a wide variety of arts then considered to be primitive, including African carvings and Cambodian sculptures, as well as the thirteenth-century paintings and sculpture of his native Italy. He was invited by his friend Gino Severini to join the Futurist art movement which celebrated the dynamism of modern life. Modigliani preferred instead to pursue his own artistic development.
Matta joined the French surrealist group in 1937 before moving to New York two years later. His paintings appear abstract but are based on drawings of erotic and violent scenes. In the two side panels of this triptych the imagery has a mechanistic, science fiction quality. But in the centre the forms are organic, suggesting references to sexual parts. Matta was concerned with capturing the inner world of the mind. Black Virtue evokes a mental landscape in an extreme combination of eroticism and violence.
During the rise of the Nazi regime in the Thirties, Klee became a target of their campaign against degenerate art. In 1933 Klee was stripped of his teaching post at the Bauhaus and fled to Switzerland where he fell ill, produced far fewer paintings, and died in 1940. More than a hundred of his works were confiscated from German museums and collections. Walpurgis Night is the night that marks the transition from winter to spring, falling on the eve of the first of May. In folk tradition, witches would gather on the Brocken, the highest of the Harz Mountains, to perform rituals to ward off evil. According to his son Felix, such legends exerted a particularly strong influence on Klees work.
The themes of this work appear to be art, dance, sex and religion. It was inspired by a Tantric painting of the god Shiva represented as Lord of the Dance and copulating with the goddess Sakti. Johns presents the dance abstractly in the 'dancing' forms on the canvas, but at the centre top and bottom of the frame are stylised images of a vulva and testicles. The work is dedicated to Johns's friend the celebrated dancer Merce Cunningham. His name and the title are written along the bottom of the picture but intermingled: The words are composed of alternate letters, read right to left, beginning with the fourth letter from the left edge and continuing inwards from the right edge.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
In one of his most physically powerful works, Kounellis blocks a doorway in the exhibition space, thereby restricting the possible access and exit points from the gallery. Like many of his contemporaries, Kounellis turned to an ancient technique in order to address current concerns. Here the traditional method is dry stone building, used most commonly to divide farmland, but also alluding to the blocked doorways of abandoned houses in the artists native Greece. The work draws attention to the architecture of the museum and creates a somewhat threatening environment for the spectator.
This work, in carved plaster, is one of only two  known surviving sculptures by Nicholson. Both are  in the Tate collection. The second is a painted  hardwood carving, 'c.1936 (sculpture)', displayed  nearby. Nicholson's practice of carving reliefs  led him naturally to explore the possibility of  making sculpture, which he was encouraged to do  while sharing a studio with Barbara Hepworth. This  piece was shown at the Duncan Miller Showrooms,  London, in 1936, in an exhibition called 'Modern  Painting for Modern Rooms', which was intended to  demonstrate the integration of contemporary art  with the contemporary habitat. Nicholson reported  that he made four sculptures in March 1936, two in  wood and two in plaster.
Born in Edinburgh and raised in Canada, Peter Doig returned to live and work in the UK in 1979. He is known for his large landscape paintings, shown at the Tate in 1994 when he was shortlisted for the Turner Prize. Doig often bases his work on found images, such as photographs, which he abstracts and personalises to stretch the idea of representation to the limit.
Dramatic Alpine scenes were a stock feature of Sublime landscape. Though Turner had visited the Alps in 1802, there is no evidence that he visited the area represented in this picture, or that he actually witnessed an avalanche. Instead, the stimulus for creating this scene may have been reports of an avalanche that occurred at Selva in the Grisons in December 1808, killing twenty-five people. Yet far from attempting reportage, Turner creates an almost abstract scene of overwhelming elemental forces.
This work derived from the hills and valley  near Porthclais on the outskirts of St David's, Pembrokeshire. Sutherland wrote that such  paintings expressed the 'intellectual and  emotional' essence of a place. He conjures  up a sense of the landscape's ancient past  through the inclusion of the animal skull and  what may be standing stones in the distance.  The unnaturalistic colouring, dramatic shaft  of sunlight and minuscule fleeing figure create  a threatening atmosphere. While the theme  of a tiny man dwarfed by nature was common  in eighteenth century painting, Sutherland's  transformation of the landscape into a eerie,  primordial scene is distinctly modern.
Since the 1950s Lucian Freud has pursued an  individual artistic course as a painter and draughtsman of the nude model from life. Freud  is known primarily for his paintings, but in the last decade his graphic work has become increasingly admired. In this study of a woman, his fascination with the substance and physical quality of flesh can be seen in the detailed folds of loose skin around the woman's neck and chest. His  unflinching eye reveals both the vulnerability  and fallibility of the human body. The wear and  tear of experience is imprinted, like this woman's tattoo, on the body's surface.
The Proposal takes its title from the nineteenth century lithographic illustration over which Schwitters pasted sections of a magazine advertisement. The high colour of the advertisement is set against the monochrome of the print.  A conflict between a brash contemporary society and nineteenth-century restraint seems to be suggested. In other similar works Schwitters makes it clear that the contemporary vision being referred to is modern America. Knowing that Schwitters was an exile in wartime London when he conceived this image of prosperity makes it all the more poignant.
Smoking her  `first fag of the day` the artist squats on the toilet. Lucas often uses intimate self-portraits to undermine conventional images of femininity. The toilet is a recurring theme in her work. A social leveller, it functions as a reminder of one of our most basic human needs. Lucas presents cigarettes as another type of need. The idea of smoking as a desire which leads to self-destruction is explored in a number of her works. Uncharacteristically, she doesn''t look directly into the camera, but seems caught off guard; vulnerable rather than defiant.
Sickert painted this work during the early part of the First World War, and it has a pervasive atmosphere of strangeness and melancholy. A party of vaudeville entertainers perform on the Brighton seafront under the setting sun and artificial stage lights. Many of the deckchairs are empty, perhaps hinting at the absence of so many men in the war; the gunfire of the Western Front could sometimes be heard along the south coast of England. Against that and the deep pink of the sky, the performers seem a bit ridiculous, if not pathetic.
Moore was internationally famous for sculptures of female figures when, in the mid- 1950s, he produced a number of sculptures of vulnerable males. For these he looked to classical precedents, photographs and such other sources as the plaster casts of the victims of Pompeii. These suffering male figures spoke, perhaps, to current Cold War anxieties and memories of recent warfare.
At the end of The Divine Comedy, Dante is guided through Heaven by Beatrice, his ideal woman. Here she is surrounded by the four apostles, depicted as embodiments of the symbolic animals with which they are traditionally associated. Luke resembles an ox, a creature Lavater described as severe and simple, while Mark appears as a lion, which Lavater saw as strong and bold. John has the face of an eagle, which, according to Lavater, means he must be a brave man. Matthew is shown as a man with idealised, Christ-like features that seem to echo those of Beatrice.
Mir claimed that his paintings of the mid-1920s such as Head of a Catalan Peasant came almost entirely from hallucination. However, it is now known that he meticulously copied the image of this work from a small preparatory drawing. The grid-like structure underlying the blue wash relates to the scaling-up of the initial drawing. Mir himself was a Catalan and may have chosen to represent the peasant with a red barratina cap to symbolise support for Catalan nationalism. Other elements in the painting are either ambiguous or mysterious, with the eyes, for example, also suggesting breasts.
Bellmers fetishistic Doll sculptures were partly inspired by Jacques Offenbachs opera The Tales of Hoffmann, in which the hero falls in love with a mechanical doll. Photographs of the doll were published in 1934 in the surrealist journal Minotaure. With their explorations of voyeurism and sadism, the photographs soon became as important as the sculpture itself. This set of hand-coloured images were taken at the same time as (and closely resemble) those which Bellmer published as The Games of the Doll, accompanied by fourteen short prose poems by the surrealist poet Paul Eluard.
Eliza Wyatt is shown here with her daughter Sarah. Eliza was the daughter-in-law of James Wyatt, a print seller in Oxford who supported the Pre-Raphaelites. The prints on the wall show Renaissance masterpieces: Raphaels Madonna della Sedia, Leonardos The Last Supper and Raphaels Alba Madonna. Their flowing lines and idealised figures contrast sharply with the realistic but awkward portrayal of Eliza and Sarah Wyatt. Millais seems to be emphasising how his art challenges the Victorian taste for Renaissance art. This is also why the group called themselves the Pre-Raphaelites.
Dijkstra worked on a number of portraits of young bathers, known as the Beaches series, between 1992 and 1996, and then again in 1998. Each time, she chose a similar location and set her camera  at a relatively low viewpoint before inviting her subjects to pose. Dijkstra demands the same degree of concentration from her sitters as she has herself in preparing the shot. As a result,  her images are filled with psychological intensity. Each bather seems to scrutinise the camera, as they, in turn, are scrutinised by it.
Gallery label, September 2004
In 1611, while on an expedition to find the North-West Passage, explorer Henry Hudson and his son were cast adrift by his mutinous crew. Their fate was unknown but raised the taboo of cannibalism. Collier hints at this by posing Hudson, eerily staring out at the viewer like Dantes Ugolino by Joshua Reynolds, 1773. Incarcerated with his sons, Ugolino eats them to survive, although the act is futile and all eventually die. Here the vast, Arctic landscape remains impassive to a terrifying human drama. Colliers audience noted its relevance to ongoing Arctic explorations and the search for the North-West Passage.
Explaining its title, Hepworth described this  work as 'a fusion of two figures into one sculptural entity'. She saw it as a development from works made up of separate elements, such as Three Forms, 1935 (on display in this room). More specifically, it grew out of the drawings she made of interlocking figures. This fusion of figures could be seen as  a symbolic expression of her interest in individual and social relationships. One writer described  such carvings as 'unmistakably archetypal',relating them to the ancient standing stones near Hepworth's home in Cornwall.
Gallery label, April 2005
Gallery label, September 2004
Atkinson Grimshaw is best known today  for the moonlit landscapes of docks and leafy
In 1866 Whistler sailed to the Chilean port of Valparaiso, apparently intending to fight for Chile in their war against Spain.  The title of this picture, which associates its colouring with twilight, establishes the work as an exercise in colour harmonies in a way typical of his work.  Whistler was American, but after initially working in Paris, he moved to London in 1859.  His aesthetic suppression of subject in favour of a harmonious arrangement of colours and textures was an important forerunner of Impressionism in Britain.
Her rich dress and jewels show that this woman was of high rank, although her identity is unclear. Her most notable piece of jewellery is the cameo suspended on a black ribbon. It shows the figure of Prudence, one of the cardinal virtues and considered then an especially appropriate quality in a woman. The remains of an inscription, upper right, date the picture to between 1565 and 1568. The large heraldic arms were added later; they belonged to Lady Eleanor Brandon, but she cannot be the woman depicted because she had died in 1547, around 20 years before this was painted.
In the early 1990s a number of photographers began to shape a  new style of fashion photography  inspired by the authentic street style of  a diverse and multi-racial youth culture.
This paintings story is based on a play by the classical author Euripides. The two semi-naked men have been arrested for trying to steal a gold statue of the goddess Diana from the temple. They have been brought before Iphigenia, a priestess of Diana, to be sacrificed on the altar. But here Iphigenia recognises the man in the red drapery as her long-lost brother, Orestes. The composition of this picture was heavily influenced by the artists studies in Italy. He particularly admired the sculptural friezes on classical tombs and the Renaissance frescoes of Raphael.
Picabia painted The Fig-Leaf using glossy household paint over another work entitled Hot Eyes. The original painting, which was based on a technical drawing of a turbine brake, caused a scandal when submitted for an important Paris exhibition in 1921. The figure in the new image is derived from Oedipus and the Sphinx (1808), a neo-classical painting by Ingres, with Picabias addition of a fig-leaf (the French say vine leaf) as a reference to censorship. The inscription DESSIN FRANAIS (French drawing) sarcastically mocked the contemporary revival of interest in traditional art skills.
Hill was among the youngest of a group who, in the early 1950s, had revived an idealist abstract art. This is one of a series of reliefs in which the elements were planned using a precise mathematical formula and a module as the basic determining unit of proportion. New mass-produced materials, such as plastic and aluminium angle sections, create a sense of illusionist space through precision of design. Hill commented: Synthetic materials and other materials like glass and metal in their machine states gives the abstract artist a new and important group of media and it is with these materials that Constructionist conceptions can be realized and developed.
The clay is modelled on the imagined shape of a breath of air, exhaled from the artists mouth. At the top is the form of the interior of Penones mouth, squeezed into the clay. The impression along the side of the clay is of the artists leg, wearing jeans, as he leans forward. Penone has made many works concerning the impression of man on nature. For Breath Penone has spoken of the influence of mythological explanations of the creation of man.
As with many portraits of the period, the identity of both sitter and artist is uncertain. The womans fashionable and richly embroidered attire, with its profusion of expensive lace, indicates that she is of high birth, and probably a member of the Jacobean court. However, her loose hair, decked with pansies known as hearts ease, her location out of doors beside a peach tree, and the gesture with which she lifts her shawl as if to shield herself from the sun strongly suggest that the portrait has a personal allegorical significance that is now lost.
This portrait shows the short-story writer Mary Hutchinson.  She was the mistress of Bells husband Clive, a fact of which Bell was aware.  This may account for the unflattering nature of the portrait.  When it was exhibited, to the sitters consternation, Vanessa Bell wrote Its perfectly hideous...and yet quite recognisable.

The dazzling colours are reminiscent of work by Matisse  an artist Bell revered  and the French Fauve painters.
This is one of a series of paintings by Dubuffet in which womens bodies are flattened and exposed, subverting accepted ideals of female beauty. The distinctive surface of these works was created by applying a special paste that repelled oil paint. As the layers of paint and glaze dried, they continually reassembled themselves into new patterns and textures. Dubuffet wrote that these patterns have transported me into an invisible world of fluids circulating in the bodies and around them, and have revealed to me a whole active theatre of facts, which perform, I am certain, at some level of life.
Samaras began making boxes using found objects and materials in the early 1960s. His father was a shoemaker and, as a child, Samaras often played in his aunts dress shop: The pin is to an extent a part of the family, he once said, referring to the frequent use of pins in his work. His boxes frequently contain both soft and sharp materials. Here shards of glass both repel and attract. Samaras has said, this force to touch or not touch, destroy or caress, has always been with me.
Baselitz began to paint figures upside-down in the late 1960s, insisting that viewers should concentrate on the lines and marks of the painting rather than its resemblance to reality. He worked on this painting over a number of weeks, repeatedly adjusting the position of the two figures further apart from each other. The title Adieu reflects this sense of a growing separation: 'one of them is only half there, while the other is going away', the artist wrote. Asked about the chequerboard background, Baselitz recalled that, 'a starter's flag of a grand prix race was floating in my imagination'.
In this image Dante encounters the souls of those who have committed suicide and been transformed into trees as punishment for having relinquished their bodies. According to Lavater the tree has no physiognomy, so the figures are also stripped of any individuality. Harpies, mythological birds with the heads of women, feed upon them. 

Blake gives his Harpies beaks rather than noses, thereby emphasising their bestiality. The squat shape of the Harpies and their large feet are reminiscent of owls, birds described by Lavater as particularly stupid (contrary to modern associations of the bird with wisdom).
Figure is an early example of Moores development towards abstraction in the first half of the 1930s. In this sculpture a figure of a woman is interpreted fluidly, a rendering that is in part determined by the sensitivities of the woods grain. It was most likely created in Moores Hampstead studio. Its rounded contours, in common with others from this period, relate to the sculptors interest in the lines of the landscape, where natural forms are softened and simplified as a consequence of weathering.
Cell No.1 is one of six structures modelled on human dimensions that Absalon designed  for various major cities around the world. He intended to inhabit these cells himself, maintaining a consistent lifestyle within a nomadic existence. The structure recalls the simple forms of modernist architecture. It also refers to the impact of technology in the twentieth century, mimicking  a space capsule or nuclear shelter. Absalon explained that the cells embodied a 'desire for  a perfect universe', not in the revolutionary or utopian sense, but as a personal space for solitude and shelter.
Cox began making regular visits to north Wales after settling near Birmingham in 1841. Rhyl lay en route to his favourite destination, Betws-y-Coed. Primarily a watercolourist, Cox only took up oil painting seriously around 1840. 'Rhyl Sands' shows him working with total mastery and in a manner that is unique in British landscape painting of the 1850s.
The popularity of animal painting increased towards the end of the eighteenth century. Animals were observed with a closer attention to nature, combined with a feeling for their individual characters. Gainsborough excelled at painting dogs and often included them in his portraits. The Pomeranians shown here belonged to his friend, the famous cellist, Carl Friedrich Abel. The painting is a particularly happy example of Gainsborough's  ability to make the dogs a subject for a serious portrait in their own right.The sensitive painting of the convolvulus flowers growing on the rock to the right reveals the artist's powers of observation, but the distant landscape is purely imaginary.
The individual titles of this series of paintings list the separate pigments used to make them. The paint layers can be seen at the edges. The artist says that these edges can be read ''almost like a bar code'', making it possible to ''uncover the history of each painting''. They come from a group of fifty such works, which trace the history of painting by classifying and indexing the development of artist''s pigments, from early cave paintings to the present day. The information is taken from a chart produced by the paint manufacturers Winsor & Newton.
Expanding Form is constructed on a grid pattern of 12 units  six reliefs and six recessive spaces. The cubes are combined with smaller interlocking geometric elements. Martin often spoke about the importance of the surface of her works, and described the spaces between the relief sections as areas of play, opposition and even conflict. She described her working process as free from artistic interference and any foreknowledge of the final appearance of the work. The aesthetic of construction was often determined by following mathematical models such as the Golden Section and Fibonacci sequence of numbers.
Broodthaers made this work using an everyday casserole pot owned by his family, and mussel shells provided by a favourite restaurant. The mussel shells rise up in a column as if flowering out of the pot. Broodthaers explained: The bursting out of the mussels from the casserole does not follow the laws of boiling, it follows the laws of artifice and results in the construction 
of an abstract form. Mussels are a popular dish in Belgium, and Broodthaers intended this work in part to satirise his homeland.
This painting is one of a series of works that  were partly inspired by Lanyon's experience of  gliding. Lanyon began gliding in 1959 and the  sensation of flight added new dimensions to his  landscape painting. He gained a much stronger  feeling for the elements. He later explained: 'The  air is a very definite world of activity as  complex and demanding as the sea.. The thermal  itself is a current of hot air rising and  eventually condensing into cloud. It is invisible  and can only be apprehended by an instrument such  as a glider.. The basic source of all soaring  flight is the thermal'.
Humanity and the individual were at the centre of Lanyons concept of landscape, and throughout his life he remained fascinated with the confrontation between man and nature. This work represents Lanyons response to the 1962 wreck of the French trawler, Jeanne Gougy, which ran aground at Lands End in stormy weather. In the last year of his life, Lanyon moved from a diffused, tonal palette towards one of intense and saturated colours. The layered and gestural surface of the painting invokes the turbulent sea and the interplay of complex natural forces.
Gallery label, August 2004
This austere winter landscape was one of the most personal of Turner's exhibited pictures. It records a scene he witnessed while travelling in Yorkshire, and is said to include his eldest daughter, Evelina (in blue), and his 'crop-eared bay' horse (pulling the cart).
This mysterious picture shows the view from Nashs studio in Sussex. The dramatic perspective and strange juxtaposition of rustic objects creates a sense of the uncanny. It has been read as a statement of mourning. While the young fruit trees may suggest the defencelessness of youth, the altar-like pile of logs may be a symbol of fallen humanity; the fallen tree as a symbol for the dead was common in the art and literature of the war, not least in Nashs own paintings.For many, an idea of the timeless and enduring English landscape seemed to displace the violent destruction of the war.
Kellys unconventionally-shaped work lies somewhere between painting and sculpture. His works dont literally depict anything but are drawn from observation of both the natural and man-made environment. He derived forms from things he had seen in real life - in this case it was inspired by the hill and valley forms near his home. I think that if you can turn off the mind and look only with the eyes, ultimately everything becomes abstract, he has said.
Matisse has not disguised the fact that this figure is a model posing in a teaching studio, probably the Acadmie Carrire in Paris. His principal concern lay with the structure and proportion of the body, and the models sinuous pose anticipates the more stylised arabesque figures of his later paintings. Her surroundings are sketched in with broad brushstrokes, becoming abstract planes of colour.
Gallery label, July 2008
Prendergast omits all place names from this map of North America, except for those which include the word 'lost'. She parodies conventional ideas about maps and their use as a means of orientation. By removing familiar names she transforms the physical terrain into a zone of the imagination.
The title conflates Hepworth's recurrent theme  of two figures in harmonious conjunction with  her interest in the ancient standing stones that  can be seen in the landscape around St Ives. Appropriately, this work is carved from Cornish slate. The artist's first slate sculptures were carved from the bed of an old billiards table. The larger figure contains a striking fossil, which was created by a small creature swimming through the silt that solidified, preserving the pattern of eddying mud  in the stone.
Bulloch has made a number of works using Belisha beacons, which are more commonly used to illuminate pedestrian crossings. Here they are linked to a microphone in the gallery space and respond to sound, which initiates a sequence of flashing lights. The colours of the lights reflect the colours of the West Ham football strip, and the works title suggests that football anthems are a particularly appropriate trigger to speed up the light display. The unpredictable interactive element of this work is typical of Bullochs practice.
Gallery label, July 2008
This was painted from life in the artist's garden at North Corner, Newlyn, Cornwall. The model is probably Eileen Mayo, a London-based professional model whom Dod Procter invited down to Cornwall and made the subject of several other paintings. All the other paintings of Mayo show her in an interior, this is the only canvas which depicts her nude in the open air. Procter produced numerous paintings of nude women and young girls during the decade 1925 to 1935 which were highly acclaimed for their objectivity and simplicity. What was, and still is, unusual is that these female nudes were painted by a female artist.
Since 1989, Horn frequently has embedded texts in  her sculptures. In this work, the top edges of  letters can be seen on two sides of an aluminium  slab. At first glance they resemble the calibrated  forms of universal bar codes. When the viewer  walks around the work the phrase 'to see a  landscape as it is when I am not there' becomes  legible. The line is from 'Gravity and Grace' by  the French writer Simone Weil. Horn uses the  phrase to remind us to look carefully at what we  see, and to try to perceive the world without the  filter of cultural preconceptions that may distort  our vision.
Schmidt-Rottluff made several portraits of Dr Rosa Schapire (18741954). Trained as an art historian, she was one of the first supporters of the Brcke group, of which Schmidt-Rottluff was a founder member. Both this work and Woman with a Bag were incorporated in the decorative scheme, which Schmidt-Rottluff carried out in 1921 for her apartment in Hamburg. She came to England in 1939 as a refugee from Nazi persecution, bringing with her a large collection of Schmidt-Rottluffs work.
Vanessa Bell usually painted still lifes and portraits of her family, but she experimented briefly with abstract art when encouraged by Roger Fry and Duncan Grant. The subject here is a professional model, and the picture was probably painted as an exercise when Bell returned seriously to painting after bringing up her daughter. She then visited Paris, where she admired the new paintings by Picasso of monumental nudes. Her still lifes always give a sense of the pleasure of touch, with warm earth colours, and these are also features of her appraisal of this plump young woman.This painting was chosen by Wendy Cope.
Demolished captures the destruction of tower blocks in three different housing estates in Hackney, east London, between 1993 and 1995. According to Whiteread, this work is something that is going to be completely forgotten... the detritus of our culture.During the Thatcher era, Whiteread was particularly concerned by the social and economic changes introduced by the Conservative party, and their impact on homeless people in London. This work operates as a metaphor for neglect and disappearance, commemorating what no longer exists.
Mary Beale was the most prolific professional female portraitist working in England in the 17th century. This engagingly informal oil sketch was probably an experiment in attempting to finish a work in one session, rather than the more costly and time-consuming four or five. Mary Beale used members of her family and studio as models for such works. In 1681, for example, her female studio assistant and her godchild were painted in side face, as here.
In this series Sherman radically alters her appearance using make-up, hairstyles, hats and different facial expressions. She has explained, I made [them] to show the process of turning one character into another. At that time I was merely interested in the use of make-up on a face as paint used on a blank canvas. Shermans self-transformation, combining evident staging with the successful portrayal of a character type, continues to be central to her work today.
This is a sketch for a satirical painting which caused one of the greatest art scandals in 18th-century Britain. The conjuror is Joshua Reynolds, president of the Royal Academy, magically creating new paintings from old master prints. Hone used Reynoldss favourite model, a poor man called George White, to sit for the figure of the conjurer. Hones finished painting was rejected from the Royal Academys 1775 exhibition, ostensibly because it shows the artist Angelica Kauffman dancing naked in the group of artists at the top left. But Hones real offence was to accuse Reynolds of stealing ideas and poses from old master paintings.
The image here is a single line which Cohen continued till the whole surface was covered. Changing the colours at random intervals, he painted it one stretch at a time, first by brush, in oil paint, and then by overspraying with an emulsion of oil and egg. This yielded a line with two distinct textures, each immaculate. As with 'Fall', also in this display, the title of this work refers to the French writer Albert Camus. Cohen admired Camus's belief in stoical persistence combined with acknowledgement of life's absurdity. In his philosophical essay 'The Myth of Sisyphus' (1942) Camus relates how 'The Gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would roll back of its own weight'. Adapting a phrase from Camus's essay, this picture's title refers to the moment when the unbroken line returns to the bottom edge of the canvas, where it began.
Influenced by Surrealism and the Fluxus movement, Messagers works subvert hierarchies of power in the relationships between male and female, nature and culture, vulnerability and aggression. In this work she draws parallels between the potential cruelty of childrens play and that of modern social and political structures. The pikes echo those used to display guillotined heads during the French Revolution; women were not allowed to carry these macabre trophies.
As well as his abstract work, Pipers early works include collages such as this one. Though influenced by the works of Braque and Picasso in the technique he used, Piper tended to take the British landscape, often a seaside scene, as his subject. In this case, the scene is the Seven Sisters cliffs near Eastbourne, and the newsprint is taken from the New Statesman, for which Piper wrote a number of articles at this time.
We dont know exactly who this woman was. The dog and the lizard it is chasing are symbols of fidelity, which suggest she may have been engaged or newly married. Van Dyck was born and trained in Antwerp. He worked in Rubenss studio and travelled in Italy, studying the work of Titian, before moving to London in 1632. In the same year he was knighted and appointed Charles Is Principal Painter. His portraits gave his royal and aristocratic sitters an unprecedented glamour and elegance and had a profound influence on the course of British portraiture.
This portrait of Lady Anne Pope (c.15991629) is rich in symbolic elements. Her ornate dress is embroidered with carnations, roses and strawberries, symbols of love and health, while her pearls represent wealth and purity. Her loose hair indicates her maiden status, for Lady Anne never married. The cherries shown on the tree were thought of as the Fruit of Paradise, and were given as a reward for virtue. The portrait, set in a painted oval, shares the poetic and private qualities found in the miniature paintings that were so popular during this period.
The bather was almost certainly Bonnard's companion and wife-to-be Marthe, who was the artist's constant and favourite model. Like Degas before him, Bonnard liked to present his nude female figures in domestic settings, caught in mid-movement during some act of their toilette. He sketched and photographed Marthe as she bathed and dressed, and used these images as a reminder when executing his oil paintings in the studio. As shown in this painting, Bonnard was particularly interested in the play of reflections of coloured light on the body and the room.
Like many of Chagall's prints from the early 1920s  'The Vision' is based on an earlier work which  dates from 1917. After Chagall moved to Paris in  1923 he created new versions of many of the works  he had made in Russia. 'The Vision' depicts the  young painter at his easel being visited by an  angel. Chagall's paintings were often inspired by  his dreams, and the winged angel is only one of  many fabulous beings which people his compostions.  Chagall recognised that through his art he could  escape into his imagination. He later said  that painting 'appeared to me like a window  through which I could fly away toward another  world.'
Messalina was the wife of the Roman Emperor  Claudius, and was noted for her sexual appetite  and depravity. At night she would leave the  Imperial palace to voluntarily work in a brothel,  a journey which Beardsley depicts here. The design  was produced for an edition of Juvenal's 'Sixth  Satire', published by Leonard Smithers. Smithers  published a succession of erotic material in the  1890s, some of it illustrated by Beardsley.  Previously refuted or ignored, the female libido  was very much a topic of quasi-scientific and  religious debate in the 1890s, when opinion began  to acknowledge it for the first time. This  coincided with the beginnings of a reconsideration  of women's status in society.
Gallery label, August 2004
Clausen studied in France and painted open-air rural naturalist subjects in an impressionist style. In 1886 he helped to found the New English Art Club as an alternative exhibition venue to the Royal Academy. This is a portrait of a local girl from the village of Cookham in Berkshire, where the artist was living. The delicate play of light across the models features, together with the flicked brushwork in the background, suggest both the freshness and transience of youth.
In the mid-1960s, Baselitz embarked on a series of paintings depicting male figures that dominate the space of the picture. While they bear some relation to the heroic figures of Social Realist art, they were also portrayed as wounded or dishevelled. According to the artist, this figure holds the pole of a flag in one hand, while the other hand is bandaged. Details such as the burning house appear in other works in the series. 'I was concerned with a very direct, almost illustrative method of representation', Baselitz has said of this work.
In the 1880s Clausen devoted himself to painting realistic scenes of rural work after seeing such pictures by the French artist Jules Bastien-Lepage (1848-84). In this picture he shows a family of  field workers topping and tailing swedes for  sheep fodder. It was painted at Chilwick Green near St Albans, where the artist had moved in  1881. He uses subdued colouring to capture the dull light and cold of winter, and manages to convey the hard reality of country work. Such unromanticised scenes of country life were often rejected by the selectors of the Royal Academy annual exhibitions.
Van Somer came to Britain in 1616, and worked for Anne of Denmark, wife of the British king James I. This portrait may relate to her death early in 1619, for the sitter, who is dressed in black, had been a favoured attendant of Queen Anne. Under her heart, Lady Kent wears a jewel with the crowned monogram AR, standing for the Latin Anna Regina (meaning Anna the Queen). It is probably a closed miniature-case, as a very similar example, given by the queen to another lady in waiting, is in the collection of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.
Braque made seven paintings of billiard tables between 1944 and 1952. He was probably attracted to the challenge of depicting the table without recourse to traditional perspective. The flat rectangular surface of the table, enclosed within a wooden frame, can also be seen as a symbol for painting and the idea of artistic creation as an elaborate game. The complex composition is filled with decorative elements, including a straw boater and a scarf hanging from the hat stand, ornate hanging lamps, and an abacus for keeping score.
The Hesperides were the three daughters of Hesperus, the evening star. They tended a tree of golden apples on the slopes of Mount Atlas. Here, the goddess Discord picks one, setting in train the events leading to the Trojan war. The apple was subsequently awarded to the goddess Aphrodite by Paris, after she had promised him the most beautiful woman in the world: the Greek Queen, Helen, wife of Menelaus, whom Paris then abducted.  It seems Turner may have been alluding to recent in-fighting at the Royal Academy in his choice of subject.
Gruber was committed to realism and to Communism. Job was painted for an exhibition which opened shortly after the liberation of Paris  in 1944. Gruber uses the Biblical story of Job's suffering as an allegory for the survival of hope under the Occupation. The inscription, which comes from The Book of Job, translates as: 'Now, once more my cry is a revolt, and yet my hand suppresses my sobs.'
'Achaian' belongs to the stripe paintings which Riley made between 1980 and 1985. In late 1979 she had visited Egypt for the first time. As a result of this experience Riley's use of colour underwent a further major development and she evolved what she called her 'Egyptian palette'. This is characterised by colours of greater intensity than she had used previously, a development accompanied by her decision to change from acrylic to oil paint. At the same time she returned to using stripes as the basis of her compositions. As in her stripe paintings of 1967-73, Riley's use of the stripe format represents a desire to use 'unassertive forms' which allow the colours to establish the painting's structure.
Vantongerloos aim was to render visible the beauty of space. This work is one of his earliest abstract sculptures. It attempts to give solid form to the relationships between pure, geometric shapes. Vantongerloo made contact with the De Stijl group while working in The Hague in 1917. He immediately began experimenting with abstraction. If in sculpture, the interrelation of volumes achieves unity he wrote, it is because everything is balanced.
In this simple dinner party scenario a practical joke escalates into bickering and violence. Nauman hired actors to perform it, getting them to play the scene a number of different ways. The variations include one where the male/female roles are reversed; a sequence showing the rehearsals which include the directors instructions on the sound track; and slow motion segments 

of the chair-pulling action. The wall of blaring monitors, the scripting, and hypnotic repetition all build the aggressive tension. Moral judgements are called into question as the power relations shift and the drama unfolds.
Nayral was a modernist publisher who shared Gleizess fascination with the theories of Henri Bergson. The interweaving of the sitter and the setting in this portrait reflect Bergsons ideas about the simultaneity of experience. It was works such as this, which was widely exhibited at the avant-garde Salons, that fed the public outcry against Cubism. Its scale echoes the large-scale paintings of the official exhibitions, while its style subverts that tradition.
Letter to my Son is one of Jorns most ambitious paintings of the late 1950s, the period in which his international reputation was established. The title refers to his son, Ole, who was born in 1950. It is one of a number of works by Jorn that refer to families and childhood. The layered composition includes at least a dozen frenetic figures, loosely delineated with great energy. They have a spontaneous urgency that recalls the childrens drawings that Jorn admired during his CoBrA period.
Caro began to work in steel following a trip to America in 1959, often using pre-formed industrial sections such as girders and joists. In the mid Sixties he used steel, cut and sprayed with colour, in balanced constructions of planes and beams directly on the floor, bolted and welded together. The appearance of any Caro sculpture changes radically as one walks around it.
This phallic form was based on a broken piece of the mould from another sculpture. It originally helped to support the underside of the breast on a female nude in Duchamps installation Etant donns. By creating a male form from a rib-like structure in a female figure, Duchamp was inverting the Book of Genesis, in which Eve is created from Adams rib. The French word dard (dart) is slang for penis, and the original title Objet-Dard is a pun on objet dart, or work of art.
Polkes work often brings together images from different sources and visual styles, with abstract and figurative elements jostled together in the same painting. Here a winged angel and a group of women are combined with areas of free-flowing paint reminiscent of contemporary abstraction. The classical imagery has been enlarged to show the black benday dots from which it is composed, emphasising its source in an existing printed image. Dripping and flowing painterly gestures are usually associated with individualism energy and dynamism, but Polkes use of them seems to ironically question those values.
Wallis had worked as seaman, ice cream vendor and scrap merchant before he took up painting as a hobby in his retirement. He lived in St Ives, Cornwall, a fishing community and artists colony. There he encountered the painters Ben Nicholson and Christopher Wood and his work was shown with theirs in London. Most of his paintings are of his local environment or of places and events remembered from his past. Here, one can readily identify the large, white building opposite Walliss front door, St Nicholass chapel on the hill, fishing boats in St Ives Bay and a larger vessel emerging from the docks at Hayle.
This painting depicts the violence and suffering endured by ordinary people in Mozambique during the War of Independence from Portugal (196474) and was made while the conflict was still raging. Figures overlap, seemingly merging into one another and collapsing any sense of perspective, a reflection on the importance of community and social relationships, shown here in meltdown. Three years before painting this, the artist had been imprisoned for eighteen months by the Portuguese secret police for his involvement in FRELIMO (the Front for Liberation of Mozambique).
Moore kept abreast of developments in Paris and contributed to the International Surrealist Exhibition in London. Several of his works explore feelings of uncertainty and anxiety that relate to Surrealism. The use of space in Three Points creates a sense of anticipation. Moore commented: This pointing has an emotional or physical action in it where things are just about to touch but dont... like the points in the sparking plug of a car... the spark has to jump across the gap.
Moore treated the subject of mother and child repeatedly. This sculpture is one of a group of small bronzes made by the artist during the early 1950s that focus specifically on the relationship between mother and child. During the Second World War Moore's interpretation of the theme emphasised the mother's nurturing role, a response to the human suffering of war. He continued to explore this aspect of the subject in the 1950s. Here he distorts the figures to suggest the submission of the mother to the aggressive needs of the child as it tries to suckle from her breast.
Dramatic in scale and execution, Leightons design depicting the resurrection of the dead before the Last Judgement (Book of Revelation) was originally created for the dome of St Pauls Cathedral. Leighton may have used Michelangelos Last Judgement from the Sistine Chapel, Rome as an inspiration. Figures are shown rising out of tombs or the depths of a vast ocean. The main group are a husband, wife and child who have emerged united. Their posture and skin tones underline the stages of resurrection, from the limpness and pallor of death to the vigour and reddish hue of renewed life.
Flowers were a major subject in Grant's later work. The garden represented is that at Charleston farmhouse, near Firle in Sussex, which he shared with the painter Vanessa Bell and where he lived and worked from 1916 until his death. Charleston, its interior decorated by Grant and Bell and its garden developed and frequently recorded by them in their paintings, became a meeting place for artists and writers in the Bloomsbury circle. The house and garden have recently been restored and opened to the public.
Seven figures are assembled on a bench, their attention apparently focused on a fixed point. They are convulsed in silent laughter, the cause of which is unclear. The unsettling effect of the encounter is accentuated by Muozs manipulation of scale. The figures are slightly smaller than life size. When seen from a distance, they appear to be of regular height; yet the slight reduction in size means that they still seem far away, even when viewed in close proximity. This optical device further emphasises the void between the figures and the viewer.
In 1964 Moon changed from using oil paints to acrylics, which he preferred for their flat finish and consistent colour. In Hoop-La the colours create an optical illusion where the blue dots appear to produce after-images on the red ground. This perceptual trick generates a sense of movement which is further enhanced by the cropping of the blue dots. The asymmetrical arc arrangement of these elements makes the whole composition seem to rotate.
Nauman has explained that these Studies for Holograms grew out of his performance works: 'The idea of making faces had to do with thinking about the body as something you can manipulate. I had done some performance pieces - rigorous works dealing with standing, leaning, bending - and as they were performed, some of them seemed to carry a large emotional impact. I was very interested in that: if you perform a bunch of arbitrary operations, some people will make very strong connections with them and others won't.'
Sylvester compared the process of revision evident in Giacometti''s paintings and sculptures, to the process of developing an argument. One puts forward a thesis, becomes aware of the opposing view, tries to incorporate that view, and so finds a new balance. ''Each day''s work [for Giacometti]'', Sylvester wrote, ''seemed an attempt to reconcile the contradictions between what had been got so far and what emerged as he went on looking.''
The apparently random collection of papers in Aphorism come together to create a tiny but carefully balanced composition. The subtle tones  of the pieces of buff paper are accented by insertions of strong colour. The layers are piled high in the top left corner, while in the lower corner the blue, green and white patterned paper seems to form a human profile. The alignment  of the profile's mouth with the dotted line across the centre of the collage is perhaps suggestive  of Schwitters' poetic recitations.
Sargent was commissioned to paint Kathleen, Cary Phyllis and Sylvia Hunter by their mother Mary, who was a leading Edwardian society hostess and close friend both of Sargent and Rodin.  The fan held by the centre figure echoes the overall sweep of the young womens full skirts in what is a highly innovative composition.  The sisters are seated on a confidante circular sofa, and are shown with their dog Crack.  On seeing this picture when it was first exhibited Rodin declared that Sargent was the van Dyck of our times.  This is plausible, for while having absorbed the influences of impressionism, Sargents work was firmly and consciously rooted in the portrait traditions of van Dyck and Velzquez.
The title of this work can be translated as Reclining nude. It is one of a small group of soft sculptures made by Tanning, an American artist who first became associated with the Surrealist group in New York in the early 1940s. The sculptures were three-dimensional expressions of the fantastical images and narratives of her paintings. Here the rounded forms, the suggestion of vertebrae made by table tennis balls inside the work, and the limb-like extrusions wittily evoke a nude of surprising vitality and sensuality.
This picture derives from one of six oil sketches which Whistler produced as part of a plan for a frieze commissioned by the shipping magnate, Frederick Leyland, for his house at Princes Gate in Kensington.  The Six Projects, as they became known, are now in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington DC.  The flowering cherry, the parasol and the shallow frieze-like arrangement are signs of a deliberate Japanese style.  This painting, like those of Whistlers friend Albert Moore, is devoid of any narrative, and instead evokes a mood and atmosphere designed to engage the senses directly.
This work shows a view of Willy Lotts House at Flatford from the River Stour. The farmer lived continuously in the same house for over eighty years and for Constable it came to represent an important part of the Suffolk landscape, a nostalgic symbol of the natural way of life. In this painting Constable has made the house look grander by adding half-timbering on one side and some extra windows. The trees on the right of the picture are also larger, more expressive and more contorted than in earlier versions and there is a development towards looser and more expressive handling of paint.
Kossoff was born and studied in London, and now works here. 'Ever since the age of twelve I have drawn and painted London. I have worked from Bethnal Green, the City, Willesden Junction, York Way and Dalston.' Kossoff chooses to paint bomb sites, excavations, railway stations and their booking halls, and indoor swimming pools, subjects that give a strong flavour of the experience of everyday urban existence. He has painted a series of pictures on the subject of the grand city church, Christchurch, Spitalfields, by the architect Hawksmoor, and this painting focuses on the relationship between the diminutive figures in the street and the looming presence of the church.
This is one of a series of four portraits  of Mr and Mrs EJ Power, commissioned from Hodgkin by Mr Power and painted over a period of eight years. The Powers had a marvellous collection of post-war European art at their London home and Hodgkin's painting evokes the experience of being with them in the setting of their collection. Hodgkin has described the content of this picture: Two sculptures  by Westerman, a Brancusi, a Pollock, a panelled wooden ceiling, as well as the owners; the wife slipping away to the right and the husband talking in green  in the foreground.
During the Second World War, Fautrier was associated with the French Resistance, and briefly imprisoned by the Gestapo. Large Tragic Head is one of over thirty paintings and sculptures that he made during the Occupation, and suggests the brutality of Nazi atrocities. Here the artist deliberately disfigured the face of the sculpture, clawing deep furrows into the wet clay. The expressive gesture is implicitly associated with sudden violence, and contrasts with the delicate modelling of the eye and gasping mouth.
The central panel of Triptych was painted in 1997 and is flanked by two further panels made in 2002. At first sight they seem wholly abstract, resembling spontaneous painting gestures. In fact, they consist of carefully selected, enlarged and subsequently altered details from Polkes earlier series of Machine Paintings, which were based on images taken from newspapers and magazines. The transparent fabric on which the triptych is painted allows us to see the wooden stretcher behind its surface, thereby subverting the traditional illusionism of the painterly surface.
Between 1817 and 1844, Turner made
seven tours of Germany. In Turners time,
Germany consisted of many different
states, formed as the German
Confederation in 1814 after the fall of
Napoleon, who had ruled since 1806.
This painting commemorates the 1842
opening of the Walhalla temple (Wallhalla
in Turners spelling), a classical building
overlooking the river Danube, constructed
under the auspices of king Ludwig I of
Bavaria as a symbol of national unity
and a monument to great Germans of
the past.

At the Royal Academy, Turner exhibited the
painting with lines from his poem Fallacies of
Hope:
Lhonneur au Roi de Bavire:
Who rode on thy relentless car, fallacious Hope?
He, though scathed at Ratisbon, poured on
The tide of war oer all thy plain, Bavare,
Like the swollen Danube to the gates of Wien.
But peace returns  the morning ray
Beams on the Wallhalla, reared to science, and
the arts,
For men renowned, of German fatherland.
'Faa Iheihe' was painted in Tahiti, where Gauguin spent his last years. It seems to represent an earthly paradise of men and women in harmony with nature. Indeed, it has sometimes been subtitled 'Tahitian Pastoral'. Gauguin found great inspiration in Tahiti, and wrote in 1898, 'Each day - my latest important paintings attest to this - I realise that I have not yet said all there is to say here in Tahiti ... whereas in France, with all the disgust I feel there, my brain would probably be sterile; the cold freezes me both physically and mentally, and everything becomes ugly to my eyes.' 'Faa Iheihe' may mean in Tahitian 'to beautify'.
Over a period of three years, Salcedo traveled to the northern heartland of Colombias civil war and spoke to children who had witnessed the murder of their parents. These testimonies inspired a series 
of three sculptures given the collective title Unland. Conjoining two fragmented tables, this work suggests the dysfunction caused by extreme trauma. We spend our life around tables and their familiarity helps to draw you in, Salcedo has said. Yet these objects have been forcibly united... and appear to be like the mutated remains of an accident.
LeWitt's wall drawings are executed by assistants from the artist's instructions. In this work, the lines are all equally spaced and drawn in coloured pencil. Each colour corresponds to a different type of line: yellow for horizontal, black for vertical, red for diagonal from left to right, and blue for diagonal from right to left. The lines are drawn in all possible combinations in fifteen rectangles, becoming denser from left to right. Through this layering, new colours and complex patterns emerge from LeWitt's simple set of rules.
Gilbert Proesch and George Passmore, known always by their first names, have been collaborating for over thirty years. They met while students at St Martin's School of Art in 1967. They have worked in the media of video, performance, painting, drawing and  photography. In 1970 they began calling themselves 'living sculptures' and, wearing conservative suits and striking statuesque poses, became the primary subjects of their art. Red Morning Trouble shows the artists in contemplative attitudes with red and black panels showing reflections in the river and modernist buildings along London's river bank. It is a picture of ordinariness, with the shirt-sleeved artists resembling city workers ready to step out into mundane life.
Whiteread makes casts of carefully chosen objects, most of which bear the trace of human use. She casts the negative spaces around or beneath these objects, which then become the positive forms of the sculptures. In Untitled (Nine Tables), the artist takes a familiar item of furniture, but presents only the residue or memory of its presence. This evokes the past of the object as well as the lives of those who once used it. Whiteread has said: I always use secondhand things, because theres a history to them.
From the mid-1950s, Giacometti concentrated on portraiture, repeatedly drawing and sculpting his immediate circle of friends and family. His brother Diego, who sat for this bust, was one of his most frequent models. The flattened head allows Giacometti to accentuate the profile, reminiscent of ancient Egyptian figures, yet also convey the psychological intensity of the face viewed from the front.
Gallery label, August 2004
Vernon Lee was the pseudonym of the writer Violet Paget (1856-1935), best known for her books on Italian Renaissance art. Sargent had known her since childhood when their families had been neighbours in Nice, and she remained a friend all his life. This portrait sketch was painted in a single session lasting three hours. Sargent gave it to her, writing on it through the paint 'to my friend Violet'.From the late 1870s Sargent was amongst those artists trained in Paris who made Impressionism an international style, blended with the technique and attitudes of old masters such as Velasquez. In this sketch his free brushwork makes for a brilliant illusion, and suggests the ambiguity of this author who adopted a male name.
Emak Bakia is made from the neck of a cello and loose horse hair. Man Ray found the original cello piece in a fleamarket. As it looked old, he felt the urge to point humorously to its age and gave it flowing white hair  the horse hair that would be used in a bow. The hair gives the piece a disconcerting vitality. The title comes from an experimental film or cine-poem of the same name that Man Ray made in 1926. In the Basque language it means leave me alone.
Monument explores memory, death, history, heroism,  representation and time. Its subject is taken from  a series of Victorian ceramic tiles photographed  by Hiller in a London park. These commemorate acts  of courage by ordinary men, women and children.  Hiller's greatly enlarged photographs draw  attention to changes wrought by time and have a  powerful formal presence. The sound track, which  the viewer should listen to after looking at the  photographs, is crucial to an understanding of  work; it makes the viewer/listener an active  participant and an integral part of the  installation when seen by other spectators. Hiller  pioneered installation in the early 1980s. The  combination here of sound and image was  innovatory.
As in this case, the interiors by the Danish artist Hammershoi are usually of his own house in Copenhagen. Several others also include a figure seen from behind, but many are of the empty rooms. He travelled and exhibited in Europe, and was well known in London early in this century. He had lived here in 1896-7, partly in the hope of meeting Whistler, whom he admired.
This portrait shows the acclaimed actor Mary Ann Yates (17281787) as Mandane, a character in Arthur Murphys tragedy The Orphan of China 1759. Yates is shown raising her hands in a way that would indicate she is speaking. Her vividly coloured costume presumably corresponds with her stage outfit. Yates found fame in the role, which she took up from the opening performance at David Garricks Theatre Royal on Drury Lane, London in 1759. The play was revived at the same theatre in 1764, with a special performance For the Benefit of Mrs Yates.
Vanessa Bell lived in Asheham House, near Lewes in Sussex, in the summer of 1912. Several artists came to stay including, briefly, Frederick Etchells and his sister Jessie. Bell thought Jessie a nice character...and very silent but found Frederick difficult, and their visit was a strain. There is no sign of this in the relaxed atmosphere of this image. Bell never exhibited this painting, but it is finished. It is chiefly a study in colour and design; the features of the figures are noticeably absent. Bell tried to expunge specific detail in much of her work of this period.
Ben Nicholson was, with his second wife Barbara Hepworth, a leading figure in the international modern movement in Britain. With artists in continental Europe and North America such as Mondrian, Moholy-Nagy and Calder they worked together to achieve and promote an art that was abstract, synthesised with architecture and design. In defiance of the increasingly antagonistic nationalism engulfing Europe, position was explicitly internationalist and utopian. The compositional quietude of Nicholsons white reliefs provided an aesthetic model for a possible social harmony.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include artists, gallerists and cultural institutions. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality.  These posters were fly-posted overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use pseudonyms. They continue to produce publicity exposing discrimination, as well as conducting seminars and workshops in schools, colleges and art institutions.
Woodrow has commented: 'The head, mounted colonial fashion on the wall, was constructed around an ironing board because of its triangular shape and strong frame. I used the ear shape of some old wall maps of Africa and South America... The fact that they are third world continents soon became the point of the work. I thought of jungles, deserts, shanty towns, natural forces, technology, tribes, revolutions This finally produced an elephant lifting an automatic weapon from a water hole, with the car doors I had found at a breaker''s yard forming its banks.'
Innes and Augustus John painted together  at Nant-Ddu in autumn 1911 and summer 1912. John wrote that Innes 'was never happier than when painting in this district'. Arenig is the name  of the mountain to the north-west of Lake Bala,  the shore of which can be seen in the foreground, viewed from Nant-Ddu. This is the largest and latest of all Innes's known paintings of Arenig,  and it may have been completed in London rather than on site in North Wales. It shows the influence of pictures by Matisse and Le Douanier Rousseau, which Innes may have seen in Paris.
Gallery label, September 2004
Martin Parr is best known for his  high-colour, scathing depictions of everyday life and customs in Britain. Common Sense comprises 350 photographs, a selection of which  is displayed here. Taken all over the world, at the height of the 1990s, they dissect modern consumerism, focusing on details of fast food, souvenirs and plastic toys and exposing national clichs. When first made, the global nature of  the work was underscored by its being exhibited simultaneously in a number  of venues around the world.
In 1615, Elizabeth Watson was married to Sir William Pope of Wroxton in Oxfordshire. She may be wearing a costume that relates to a masque  a court entertainment participated in by aristocrats. Her draped black cloak, or mantle, embroidered (like her hat) with pearls in a pattern of ostrich feathers, has classical precedents. So does her partly bared breast, a feature seen in surviving drawings of masque costumes by the court designer Inigo Jones (15731652). Like the miniaturist Nicholas Hilliard, Peake originally trained as a goldsmith. From 1607, Peake was joint court painter to James I.
This is a seminal piece in the history of British art, as both Caros first abstract and first welded sculpture. He abandoned the figure following a visit to the USA in 1959 where he was in close contact with the American art critic Clement Greenberg and such abstract painters as Kenneth Noland.Constructed from found pieces of steel, Twenty Four Hours reflects the impact of American art on Caro and belonged to Greenberg at one time.
Collier was particularly noted for his trompe  l'oeil pictures, or 'deceptions', which were  painted to impress the viewer with the artist's  ability to create in paint the illusion of real,  graspable objects. The letter rack with  newspapers, notes, writing implements, seals and  combs was one of Collier's favourite subjects. He  painted many variations of it with similar objects  slightly differently arranged, but always with  different dates and printed texts.Although this picture bears no date, a clue is  given by the folded London newspaper at the top of  the rack which is dated 'Monday, May 15 ...': the  only likely Monday to fall on this date was in  1699.
In 1940 Nash was made an Official War Artist to  the Royal Air Force. He made many studies of  planes and wrecked enemy aircraft, although he was  not allowed to fly in a plane himself because of health problems. His drawings and paintings of the  period are vivid re-interpretations of the scenes  he witnessed. He was particularly interested in  the bizarre relationships between man-made and  natural forms, and making static objects appear  animated. Here the crashed German plane takes on a  totem-like presence, accentuated by the strange  shadows.
A pioneer of appropriation art, from the 1960s Sturtevant questioned ideas of authorship and authenticity by replicating other artists works. Around 2000 Sturtevant began to use video to explore the proliferation and repetition of mass media imagery in the information age. Trilogy of Transgression juxtaposes seemingly unrelated looped footage of Minnie Mouse, blurry forms and close-ups of objects protruding from an inflatable sex doll. The work invites us to see a relationship between the sexual and banal imagery, revealing the how the mind can register associations without being fully aware of it.
Reading with Globe is a drawing made directly onto the wall by tracing over a projected image using self-adhesive black tape. The drawing can be made at any size, according to the discretion of the gallery. The everyday objects brought together in the drawing are taken from a dictionary of images assembled over the years by the artist. Although the smallest item is placed in the foreground, large and small are clustered so closely together that differences in scale seem deliberately confused.
This is one of six family portraits that Sir Walter Bagot, a Staffordshire gentleman, commissioned from Wright in 1675. It shows Sir Walter's mother-in-law, the wealthy widow Elizabeth Salesbury, with his son and heir Edward, who clutches a wooden horse, and his infant younger daughter. Mrs Salesbury's peaked hat forms the apex of Wright's composition, which echoes religious images of the Madonna and infant Christ with John the Baptist. Although trained in Scotland, the Roman Catholic Wright lived in Rome before returning to Britain in 1656. He was a contemporary and rival of Sir Peter Lely.
The identity of the sitter is uncertain, but is traditionally thought to be William West (born in 1519), later Baron De La Warr and nephew of the 9th Lord De La Warre, whom he tried to poison to gain the family estates. The ring he wears bears a heraldic motif associated with the West family. Analysis of the oak panel and the pigments used, along with the style of clothes and design of the sword hilt, dates the work to around 1550. The full-frontal pose shows the influence of the portrait of Henry VIII by Holbein, painted in the 1530s.
It is not difficult to see this canvas as the raw beginnings of the kind of marine subject Turner had painted from the 1830s onwards, in emulation of seventeenth-century Dutch painters.
The arrangement of these three nude females recalls the traditional composition of 'The Three Graces'. However, Maillol insisted that they were three nymphs of the 'flowery meadows', and commented that they were too powerful to represent the Graces. His pupil Lucile Passavant, who later became a distinguished sculptor and wood-engraver, posed for the central figure when aged nineteen. Maillol worked on the three figures in plaster between 1931 and 1937. The group was cast in lead in 1938, and the edition size is thought to be six. Maillol preferred the material of lead for this group because he felt that bronze would be too dark in character for the flowery theme.
Schwitters was associated with the irreverent dada movement in 1920s Germany. He developed idiosyncratic forms of collage that combined the discarded ephemera of everyday life such as bus tickets and labels with other materials, coining the nonsense term Merz to describe his technique.Schwitters left Germany in the 1930s, arriving in Britain via Norway and spending over a year in internment camps before moving in 1941 to London, where he made this work. Schwitters often took months over his constructions, searching for appropriate elements.
The park at Primrose Hill in north London has been one of Auerbach's principal subjects. He worked daily on this painting for over a year, making more than fifty working drawings in all seasons and at different times, including midnight. The park's changing appearance influenced the development of the painting, which was continually scraped back and repainted.
This collaboration between Delaunay and poet Blaise Cendrars was envisaged as a simultaneous book, a unification of text and design in an attempt to express spoken words through colour. The poem is printed in varying typefaces and colours to reflect the erratic rhythm of thoughts and impressions formed on a train journey. Dynamic swirling colours provide a visual equivalent to the text rather than illustrating it. The collaborators intended that a complete edition would match the height of the Eiffel Tower if laid end-to-end.
Tissots paintings of fashionable Victorian social scenes were extremely popular and brought him celebrity and financial success. However some critics complained that their lack of clear narrative and moral purpose cut across the grain of British art. John Ruskin described them as unhappy mere colour photographs of vulgar society. Tissot certainly delighted in fashion and the mores of high society as can be seen in this scene which shows men and women relaxing at an event thought to be the annual regatta at Cowes on the Isle of Wight.
Mondrian visited the Zeeland region of the Dutch coast each summer during 1908-10. There, he painted towering buildings such as this church at Zoutelande. Contrasting oranges and blues create an impression of strong, flooding sunlight. This combines with the monumental scale of the tower to create a powerful, mystical mood. Mondrian later explained that pure colour was the means 'to find a new way to express the beauty of nature'.
The third and largest of Sasnals paintings relating to the death of Muammar Gaddafi shows both the Libyan dictators corpse and a group of onlookers. All but one of the figures have been rendered anonymous by the close cropping of the image so that only their bodies are visible. In this treatment of the subject, Sasnal seems to refer as much to art history as to history, evoking Andrea Mantegnas fifteenth-century depiction of the dead Christ through the dramatic foreshortening of the corpse while also echoing the monumental scale of history painting.
Blake''s invention of a method of printing in relief from etched plates, first used in 1788, gave him control over the style, production and publishing of his own books. By 1794 he had begun applying coloured pigments to his printing plates and then, as a further development, printing some of the designs in his books as separate coloured images.  Visions of the Daughters of Albion was  an illuminated book with eight designs  which Blake first advertised in 1793. This frontispiece is not part of any copy of the book but was separately printed in colours.
Nature is one of a series of works made by cutting a gash across a sphere of terracotta clay, which Fontana subsequently cast in bronze. He believed that the incision was a vital sign, signalling a desire to make the inert material live. Fontana was concerned with transformation, and the shifting, yet indestructible density of matter. The Nature series was partly inspired by thoughts of the atrocious unnerving silence awaiting man in space, and the need to leave a living sign of the artists presence.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
When he first exhibited this painting Turner appended lines adapted from the Hymn to Apollo by the Greek poet, Callimacchus. That text recounted the sun god Apollos quest to build a temple for his oracle at Delphi, which first necessitated that he overcome the giant dragon, Python, which lived nearby. 

Turner interprets Apollos slaughter of the creature as a conquest of good over evil. He shows it, in pictorial terms, as the triumph of light over darkness. However, he also includes a smaller snake emerging from the dragons wound, perhaps hinting at the inescapable cyclical regeneration of brutal natural forces.
Ligons untitled neon sculpture cleverly subverts the visual language of contemporary America. The glass tubes are painted black with some small abrasions on the paint surface nearest the wall, so that only chinks of light can be seen indirectly reflecting off the wall behind, creating a subtle halo-like effect around the blackness of the letters. The work might be seen to comment on the proliferation of commercial signs and the self-obsessed nature of American society, whilst simultaneously recalling the art historical precedents set by canonical American artists such Dan Flavin and Bruce Nauman.
Dubuffet invented various techniques to portray soil in a series of paintings called Texturologies. For this work, he adapted the Tyrolean technique, used by stone masons to texture newly plastered walls. Dubuffet shook a brush over the painting, which was laid on the floor, to scatter tiny droplets of paint across the surface. His intention was to give an impression of teeming matter, alive and sparkling, which I could use to represent soil, but which could also evoke all kinds of indeterminate textures, and even galaxies and nebulae.
Millais viewed "Speak! Speak!" as one of his most serious and profound works. His son, J.G.Millais, explained it as follows: ''A young Roman has been reading through the night the letters of his lost love; ... at dawn, behold, the curtains of his bed are parted, and there before him stands, in spirit or in truth, the lady herself, decked as on her bridal night... An open door displays the winding stair down which she has come''. It was bought for the nation for 2,000, an enormous sum in 1895 which marked the extent of Millais''s professional reputation at this date.
United Kingdom was made during the period of Scottish political devolution and the establishment of a Scottish parliament. By manipulating a road map of Great Britain, Curtis integrates Scottish and Welsh territory within the contours of England, and English and Welsh within Scotland. Furthermore, Scotland has become a separate island, occupying the position usually held by Ireland. By imposing the details of one geographical area upon the outline of another, Curtis raises fundamental questions about place and national identity.
Man Ray made this piece after the end of his passionate, and sometimes tormented, relationship with the American photographer and model Lee Miller. The lip outline may have been suggested by the memory of a lipstick imprint left by a former lover on his collar, but the lips are recognisably those of Miller. The object is evidence of his continued desire for her, mingled with suggestions of violence: the hollow lead case can be seen as a body, while the looped rope suggests a noose.
This picture was inspired by an incident during a museum visit in Berlin during 

the summer of 1962, when Hockney saw 

his travelling companion standing next 

to an ancient Egyptian sculpture of a 

seated woman. To the artist, their chance juxtaposition suggested an unlikely but amusing form of marriage between a modern living subject and a stylised, inanimate sculpture. Hockney explained:
Palmer painted this while living in Shoreham in Kent (182633). He regarded Shoreham as an ideal landscape, a rural paradise touched by a divine presence. Palmer was inspired by William Blakes illustrations (1821) to Ambrose Philipss imitation of Virgils First Eclogue and could have been describing his own work when he wrote of the Blake engravings: They are visions of little dells, and nooks, and corners of Paradise; models of the exquisitist pitch of intense poetry . . . There is in all such a mystic and dreamy glimmer as penetrates and kindles the inmost soul.
This was the first significant work Leighton painted after he returned to London from studying in continental Europe. The title refers to the Songs without Words the girl is listening to: the sound of the gently trickling water and the singing of the blackbird behind her. Leighton knew many of his viewers would connect the painting with Mendelssohns set of piano pieces of the same title, which were very popular in England at this time. The subjects timelessness, and the harmony of composition and colouring, suggest the power of music to evoke specific moods.
Argentinian Tomasello was one of the many South American artists who moved to Paris in the late 1950s and became very active within the international New Tendencies circles. From the 1960s, he concentrated on the subtle effects of light, shadow and depth with a series of reliefs titled Chromoplastic Atmosphere. These usually consisted of white floating panels with coloured paint applied to the back, so as to reflect a halo of colour on the surface behind. This work radiates a subtle neon yellow glow from its edges, while the cut-out square at the centre suggests its depth.
The quotations in this print do not come from the fairytale of Snow White, but from two homoerotic poems by CP Cavafy, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and The Mirror at the Entrance. Homosexual love, and male beauty, are the primary inspiration for this print, however Hockney has also explained that 'making a mirror have feelings is a wonderful poetic idea that strongly appeals to me'.
Richiers sculptures testify to the atmosphere of violence and destruction in European following the Second World War. The pitted and scarred surfaces of the figures, as well as the mutilated facial features, speak eloquently of human suffering. At the same time, the solidity of these personages and their strong expressive presence assert the ultimate survival of humanity despite the legacy of war. The model for this sculpture was an old man who, fifty years before, had posed for Rodins sculpture Balzac - an archetypal figure of male potency and creativity that Richier now represented as scarred and decaying.
Iris Beerbohm Tree (18971968) was a poet and actress who posed for many artists including Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant.Here Epstein exploits the qualities of bronze by combining a rough patina with a high polish. In contrast to the rough texture of the face and neck, the sculptures helmet hair has a highly polished, burnished surface. This not only suggests Trees strawberry blonde hair but also the modernity of her severely cut bob.
Dine believes that tools provide a 'link with our past, the human past, the hand'. They feature in many of his works, and can be seen as a symbol of artistic creation. There is also an autobiographical resonance, as Dine's family owned a hardware store in Cincinnati. In these prints, the tools are presented as a series of discrete items, as if laid out for analysis and classification.
De Loutherbourg was celebrated for his dramatic depictions of maritime disasters and sea battles. The subject here is the decisive moment in the battle of Camperdown, off the Dutch coast, in 1797. A British fleet defeated the Dutch, who were then allied with the French. The flagship Venerable fires its last broadside at the Dutch Vrijheid (Freedom). De Loutherbourg, who was chief designer of scenery at the Drury Lane Theatre, was more concerned with dramatic effect than documentation.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
Husband and wife team Bernd and Hilla Becher began photographing old industrial sites in the 1950s, and described their subjects as buildings where anonymity is accepted to be the style. The coal bunkers in these photographs were located in Germany, France and Britain, while the photographs of pitheads were all taken at British collieries between 1965 and 1973. Within a few years of completing this work, almost all of the structures had been demolished.
Hlion saw himself as belonging to the second generation of abstract artists in Paris, after pioneers such as Piet Mondrian and Theo van Doesburg. He was an energetic promoter of abstract or non-figurative art, and helped to found international groups such as Art Concret and Abstraction-Cration. He believed that abstract art, however radical, shared timeless values of balance, rhythm and composition with the great art of the past. In this small painting he creates a compositional unity through the visual resolution of vertical and horizontal forms and colour relationships.
Much of Bourgeois' work is autobiographical, and relates to her traumatic childhood. She idolised her mother, and loathed her overbearing, adulterous father. Bourgeois made her first prints in the 1940s and, after a gap of about forty years, returned to printmaking in 1990. Frequently child-like in style, these works portray the events and fantasies of her childhood and adolescence. The scenes include the trauma of birth, the pubescent discovery of the body, the moulding of a daughter by her mother, and the stifling of a daughter by her father.
The 1933 Nazi manifesto on artistic and cultural policy demanded that sculptures that are offensive to the national sensibility and yet still desecrate public squares and parks should disappear as quickly as possible, regardless of whether these works were created by geniuses like Lehmbruck or Barlach. Several of Barlachs war memorials were removed from churches in 1937. The Avenger had been made at the beginning of the First World War, when Barlach was a nationalist, and represents the unstoppable force of the German army. A later wooden version was confiscated by the Nazis.
Yanagi filled a series of interconnecting Perspex boxes with coloured sand to represent the flags of 49 nations. These include nations bordering the Pacific, former colonial powers, and native populations without sovereign territories such as the Maoris and Aborigines. He then released thousands of ants, whose movement distributed the sand from one flag to another. Suggestive of patterns of global migration, the ants gradually eroded the borders between different nations, creating new designs. I question the concept of a nation, Yanagi has said. A nation, its border and national flag, has become an imaginary fiction.
An extreme elongation of the female form is seen in Modigliani`s portrait of Hanka Zborowska,a friend and the wife of his dealer. The style embodies his own vision of beauty, but it derives from his interest in a wide variety of arts then considered to be `primitive`, including African carvings and Cambodian sculptures, as well as the thirteenth-century paintings and sculpture 

of his native Italy.
Picasso painted still-life subjects throughout his career and in a range of different styles. Here the dishes of fruit are depicted in a flat, graphic manner. The white area behind the pears was, unusually, added as the final layer of the painting and creates a palpable sense of space rather than a simple blank background. The different elements of the composition are separated by thick black lines and the end result is an almost abstract pattern of colours and shapes
During the winter of 1940-1 Moore, 

in his capacity as a war artist, was given access to London's public shelters. Though he concentrated on underground stations, he did make drawings of other shelters, including a vast area in the basement of a warehouse in Tilbury where he noted 'Figures lying against platform with great bales of paper above also making beds Dramatic, dismal 

lit, masses of reclining figures fading 

to perspective point - Scribbles and scratches, chaotic foreground 

Dark wet settings'.
In May 1970, a series of protests against US involvement in Vietnam and Cambodia on the campus of Kent State University, Ohio, culminated in the shooting of student demonstrators by the National Guard. Hamilton's print was made using a photograph of a TV screen, taken during a news broadcast that day. Hamilton commented: 'It was too terrible an incident in American history to submit to arty treatment. Yet there it was in my hand, by chance It seemed right, too, that art could help to keep the shame in our minds.'
John St John Long was one of the only two known pupils of John Martin, whose three 'Last Judgement' canvases are displayed above. Long's brief artistic career seems only to have spanned the 1820s. The majority of his pictures were biblical subjects. This example is an illustration of the first temptation in the wilderness when the Devil tries to tempt Christ into turning some stones into loaves of bread.By 1827, Long had set himself up as a 'doctor' specialising in the cure of consumption. In 1828 he was exposed as a quack, and following the death of two patients between 1830 and 1831, was found guilty of manslaughter. He managed to escape with a fine, and continued to practice as a doctor.
Amelia Earhart (1898-1937) was the first woman  to fly solo across the Atlantic. She landed in northern Ireland in May 1932, but this depicts  her arrival in a thunderstorm at Hanworth, near London, the following day, where she was greeted by crowds of spectators. Earhart can be glimpsed in the middle distance of the right-hand side  of the picture. Sickert based this painting on  a newspaper photograph, from which he squared up the image. It took him only five days to complete, and itself aroused much public interest when  it was exhibited soon afterwards.
Cadere questioned the traditional boundaries between painting and sculpture by developing a series of wooden bars which can be positioned in varying relations to their surroundings: leaning against the wall, lying on the floor or suspended from wall fixings. Cadere often carried these bars around, even sometimes bringing them  uninvited  to exhibitions of fellow artists. The stripy pattern of each of Caderes bars follows an idiosyncratic mathematical sequence. However, each one also contains a deliberate anomaly, which makes it harder to decipher the systems underlying rationale.
Picasso made this work at the Chteau de  Boisgeloup, near Gisors, which he had purchased in  1931. He turned the stables into a sculpture  studio, and between 1931-4 produced there some of  his most important sculptures. Most of these were  of the female figure, represented in curving,  organic forms, but he also produced three works on  the theme of the cock, a subject which may well  have been connected to his move to the  countryside. The cock's body is composed of spiky,  elongated forms, each of which has a strongly  separate identity although subordinated to the  animated whole.
Newton began to exhibit regularly at the Royal Academy summer shows in 1923 and he continued to send paintings for several decades. His chosen subjects were views of London, mostly in the  St John's Wood, Hampstead, Kentish Town and Paddington areas. He was particularly fond of including a stretch of water in his compositions and often chose back-street views of canals, as here. He liked the slightly forlorn Regency and early Victorian terraces that faced the canals, and gave them a curiously uninhabited look. He once wrote: 'There is beauty to be found in everything, you only have to search for it; a gasometer can make as beautiful a picture as a palace on the Grand Canal, Venice. It simply depends on the artist's vision.'
Rodney made this work when he was still a student and it is one of his first political works. Referencing the 1962 Hollywood film of the same title, he has challenged the traditional American portrayal of good and evil in the colonisation of the American West. Whereas the film depicted the colonisation as a brave and exciting struggle, Rodneys painting suggests a less heroic and more crudely violent narrative. The phrase painted around the figure on the left The only good Indian is a dead Indian is a saying attributed to the United States Army General Philip Sheridan in 1869.
Trouble in Paradise hovers between representation and abstraction, between the depiction of figures engaged in an indistinct erotic act and a bravura display of gestural brushwork. Set against a dramatic black background, ribbons and swirls of warm colour cover almost the entire surface of the painting. The works elusive imagery encourages viewers to fill in the blanks with their own projected desires. The place I am interested in is where the mind goes when its trying to make up for what isnt there, Brown has said.
Edward Burras paintings of Harlem fall into two groups  street scenes and scenes of night-time entertainment. This painting, Harlem, depicts the areas daytime street life. Several men and women are shown in front of a row of brownstone tenements, with New Yorks elevated railway visible in the background. The street is shown as a place of social interaction: people linger on their doorsteps to smoke, talk and read newspapers. In contrast to the glamour and exuberance of Harlem nightlife, this painting presents a more downbeat scene of uncertain, possibly illicit, employment.
This unfinished painting takes us to the heart of the smoky commercial capital which, though a Londoner by birth and resident for most of his life, Turner usually preferred to depict from a distance.  Here he looks along the Thames towards Waterloo Bridge, designed by John Rennie and opened in 1817, two years after the Battle of Waterloo.

Turners view dates from the 1830s and he was perhaps planning a response in kind to John Constables Opening of Waterloo Bridge (Tate), which appeared at the Royal Academy in 1832.
Steer spent several summers on the East Coast, at  Walberswick and Southwold in Suffolk, making  pictures of holidaymakers in the sun. He made  rough notes on the spot in sketchbooks, and in the  studio made designs for a series of paintings.  These were most original in their dislocation of  the figures, and their shorthand sketchy outlines.  The colours have a brilliance that went beyond the  Impressionist paintings of Monet that Steer had  seen in London. Although they look spontaneous,  most of them took several years to complete.
Gallery label, August 2004
Endymion Porter was a favourite courtier of Charles I, for whom he bought works of art. He is shown here as a huntsman with his kill, a possible reference to the ongoing Civil War. His patronage of the arts is indicated by the statue of Apollo and the classical frieze he is leaning on. Dobson painted this portrait at the exiled court of Charles in Oxford. The pose is taken from a portrait of the Roman Emperor Vespasian by Titian, which was then in Charles Is collection. Porter was later forced into exile in France.
This work was inspired by John Keats's poem The Eve of St Agnes which was published in 1820. Hughes depicts three incidents from the poem. The frame is inscribed with the fourth verse which sets the scene for these episodes: Porphyro's approach to the castle, where a lavish banquet is in progress; his awakening  of Madeline from her dreams; and the lovers' silent escape from the dark castle into the night. The painting was exhibited at the Royal Academy the same year  as Hughes's April Love. John Ruskin described it as 'A noble picture... the face of the awakening Madeline is exquisite'.
Gallery label, September 2004
Though in Brittany, this scene is similar to many works painted by Wood in Cornwall. Towards the end of his short life, Wood spent periods working in both places in pursuit of a nave style of painting. In 1928 he visited Cornwall with his friends Ben and Winifred Nicholson. In St Ives the two men came across Alfred Wallis, whose primitive, child-like paintings made a deep impression on their subsequent work. For them, adopting Walliss instinctive style allowed them to reject the artificiality of established painting for a more authentic mode of expression.
There is no mention of this drawing in van Gogh's letters. Its very twisted, writhing forms suggest that it was made at the time van Gogh was staying at the Hpital St Paul at St Rmy. It appears to be a view of the hospital garden itself. The irises in bloom in the bottom left-hand corner suggest it was made in the early summer. Van Gogh was at St Rmy from 8 May 1889 to 16 May 1890, which suggest this was probably drawn in about June 1889.
In 1966 Latham founded the Artist Placement Group with Barbara Steveni, Jeffrey Shaw and Barry Flanagan, to set up placements for artists within organisations and businesses. The intention was that, by sharing skills, artists would play a more active and influential role in society.
Since 1999 Raad has made work addressing the recent history of Lebanon under the persona The Atlas Group. This work assembles one hundred images, showing the aftermath of car bombs in Beirut during the Lebanese civil war (1975-1990). Arranged in a claustrophobic grid, they convey the numbing repetition and banality of violence in wartime. The photographs are authentic photojournalistic images. However, the way they are presented challenges the notions of historical veracity and the reliability 
of personal and collective memory.
The Backs were Matisses largest sculptures. Over twenty years he progressively refined the original pose, based on a woman leaning on a fence, until he achieved a massive simplicity. Matisses decision to show the back view of a woman on such a monumental scale was unorthodox. By concealing her face, he avoided the complexities of visual engagement between artist and model. This helped him to consider the nude as an arrangement of forms that he could simplify and stylise.
Sir John Drake was a distant descendant of the famous Elizabethan commander Sir Francis Drake. He lived at Ashe, near Musbury in Devon. He is shown in armour, and may have seen active service during the Civil War, fighting for the Parliamentarians. Despite this, he was created a baronet at the Restoration of Charles II in 1660. The artist Edward Bower worked particularly for the Parliamentarians during the war, and probably painted this portrait in Bath in 1646. He would later paint the final portrait of Charles I, Charles I at his Trial 1648.
Jrgenssen was active in Vienna at the same time as VALIE EXPORT, yet her photographic works deal with the female body on a more intimate and poetic level. Here the artist turns her back to the viewer, with the titular sentence written with lipstick on her bare skin. This image can be interpreted as a visual pun on different levels: for example, the German word for point of view, Ansicht, implies the idea of a frontal view. Also, by expressing her statement in lipstick, Jrgenssen hints to the ways in which womens identities are filtered and shaped by social conventions.
Stubbs made a series of works in different media showing a horse attacked by a lion. His original inspiration was a famous antique marble sculpture that he probably saw on his visit to Rome in 1754. The episode shown here, with the final surrender of the horse, is closest to the classical model. The setting for this violent encounter is the harsh, rocky landscape of Creswell Crags in the Peak District. The area was then an inaccessible, wild region whose mysterious caves and crannies fascinated Stubbs. The scenery makes a suitably romantic background for the sublime drama of the scene.
Bowlings early work was figurative, but he later became an abstract painter, and this work falls between the two periods. As the titles reference to the great abstract painter Barnett Newman suggests, it might be seen as a humorous skit on Abstract Expressionism. A Newman-like composition of vertical stripes is altered by the intrusion of a stencilled map of South America. Bowling was born in British Guiana (later Guyana) and this was one of several images he used which referred to his home. The colouring may also refer to his ethnicity as they are the colours of Rastafariansim: red for the blood of those killed for the black community, green for the vegetation and gold for the wealth of Africa.
Born in Fujita, Nagasaki, Iwao Yamawaki studied architecture at the Tokyo School of Arts and after graduating worked as an architect in a construction company. During this time, he took pictures with his 35mm camera to support and document his architectural studies. In 1931 he travelled to Germany to study at the Bauhaus in Dessau and became heavily influenced by Lszl Moholy-Nagys idea that photography could open up new ways of seeing the world beyond those available to the human eye. Yamawaki travelled widely in Europe and the Soviet Union, documenting modernist architecture and design, as well as capturing student life at the Bauhaus.
Dufy, well known for his landscapes and animated crowd scenes, was commissioned in 1930 to paint this equestrian portrait of Mr and Mrs Kessler and their five daughters. He stayed briefly with the family at their country home in England, and made several preliminary studies, two of which are also owned by the Tate Gallery. This is the second of two versions of the finished work (the first was not entirely to the Kesslers' liking). It shows the artist's characteristic love of high-keyed colour and his use of a free-floating, almost hieroglyphic, line, inspired by Persian ornament.
This composition was based on a tree fallen across a grassy bank, its roots exposed. Sutherland isolated this found object and abstracted its form so that it seems to loom from the murky green surrounds. It resembles a monster, or even a truncated human figure similar to the distorted, erotic dolls of the surrealist Hans Bellmer. Writing about his process, Sutherland stated, The prototype in nature has got to be seen through the terms of art. A metamorphosis has got to take place.
Tanguy joined the surrealist movement in 1925, the year after its foundation. Despite his lack of training, he began to paint and soon achieved an astonishing technical precision, depicting vast dream-like spaces. The foreground in Azure Day is occupied by grouped and piled forms that defy rational explanation. They have been associated with the ancient standing stones of Tanguys native Brittany.
In this Normandy scene the fields are golden 

with wheat, the sky intensely blue. At a time 

when France was industrialising, and the urban population was about to outstrip the rural, the warmth of this view of the agricultural cycle 

would have been reassuringly nostalgic. 

Bringing in the harvest with horses hardly 

differed from the practices of the nineteenth century. Dufy's heightened use of colour and energetic brushstrokes also hark back, recalling Van Gogh's paintings of fifty years earlier.
This work displays Bowlings interest in paint as organic matter, pliable and beautiful. The complex texture is the result of foam, shredded plastic packing material, Christmas glitter, costume jewellery, plastic toys and oyster shells being embedded into the surface. Bowling began as a figurative painter, studying alongside R B Kitaj  referenced in the works title  at the Royal College of Art. He has talked about his move to abstraction as a process of unlearning.
The 20th century saw an expansion of opportunities for women and Gwen John and Dorelia McNeill trained at the Slade School of Art which was more liberal than the older Royal Academy. They were part of a group of Bohemians, artists and intellectuals who lived experimental life-styles. Gwen John painted Dorelia in a Black Dress while the two young women were walking through France, sleeping rough and earning a little from sketching and singing. Dorelia is shown in an informal, intimate way. Her attitude suggests her self-confidence.
This late landscape is a visionary evocation of nature. Within a symmetrical composition and vertical format, light filters through the trees. According to his son JG Millais, Millaiss inspiration was the potent voice of the wood spirits. 

Millaiss title comes from Tennysons In Memoriam A.H.H., 1850, written in response to the early death of the poets friend Arthur Hallam. Millais may also have shared Tennysons opinion that, though a work may be inspired by personal experience, its emotions are universal: I is not always the author speaking of himself, but the voice of the human race speaking through him.

From Alfred Tennyson, In Memoriam A.H.H., XI, 1850

Calm is the morn without a sound,Calm as to suit a calmer grief,And only thro the faded leafThe chestnut pattering to the ground:Calm and deep peace on this high wold,And on these dews that drench the furze,And all the silvery gossamersThat twinkle into green and gold:Calm and still light on yon great plainThat sweeps with all its autumn bowers,And crowded farms and lessening towers,To mingle with the bounding main:Calm and deep peace in this wide air,These leaves that redden to the fall;And in my heart, if calm at all,If any calm, a calm despair:Calm on the seas, and silver sleep, And waves that sway themselves in rest,And dead calm in that noble breastWhich heaves but with the heaving deep.
Gallery label, September 2004
John Rothensteins wife, the actress Alice Kingsley, posed for this picture with the artist Augustus John. It was inspired by Ibsens play The Dolls House, about Nora, a women in a disintegrating marriage. Rothenstein represented Christine Linde and Nils Krogstad in Act III, just before Krogstads letter exposes Noras deception of her husband. Rothenstein did not depict a specific scene, but captured the atmosphere of secrets before the dnouement, and the tension between Krogstad and Mrs Linde, who were once in love with each other.
Matisse painted this work while renting a house near Nice in the South of France. The relaxed, relatively naturalistic style is typical of his work of the early 1920s. It was bought by the Contemporary Art Society in 1926 with the intention of presenting it to the Tate Gallery. Matisse wrote that the painting will represent me as well as possible - moreover, I think that it will not frighten the acquisitions committee of the Modern Museum in London.' In fact, the Tate initially turned it down, but accepted it in 1938.
Gallery label, August 2004
The subject of this painting is an episode from the ancient writer Suetoniuss Life of the Emperor Caligula. Confounding a prediction that he would no more become emperor than ride across the Gulf of Baiae with horses, Caligula constructed an artificial floating bridge of boats which he then crossed with a chariot. Turner has depicted the bridge as a solid construction. It has, however, like the adjacent palace, fallen into ruin and decay. The picture was widely admired in 1831. The Times described it as one of the most beautiful and magnificent landscapes that ever mind conceived or pencil drew.
Constable was deeply attached to his birthplace, East Bergholt House, which his father had built when Flatford Mill became too small for his growing family. Although the house no longer exists (it was pulled down in 1840 or 1841), the stable block and an outbuilding survive. Constable painted views from the front and back of the house on many occasions and chose it as the frontispiece for English Landscape (1832). He wrote in the accompanying inscription: This place was the origin of my Fame.
This work was titled Film Star because it appeared in Lathams film Unedited Material from the Star. It incorporates books whose pages have been painted in 12 colours. Because the books can be opened at different pages, the work exists in different states. The film consists of a series of shots of the opened books so that they seem to be animated and appear suddenly to open, close and change colour.
Constable was deeply attached to his birthplace, East Bergholt House, which his father had built when Flatford Mill became too small for his growing family. Although the house no longer exists (it was pulled down in 1840 or 1841), the stable block and an outbuilding survive. Constable painted views from the front and back of the house on many occasions and chose it as the frontispiece for English Landscape (1832). He wrote in the accompanying inscription: This place was the origin of my Fame.
Robertss early work was abstract and he joined Wyndham Lewiss vorticist group. After the First World War, he made a name as the painter of everyday modern scenes. While film had been invented in the late 19th century, it reached new heights of sophistication and popularity in the 1920s, the age of Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton and the rise of Hollywood. Movies were silent until 1927 and were accompanied by live music. Many music halls, traditional places of popular entertainment, were adapted to show films.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
Many of Gabo's sculptures first appeared as tiny models. They were often projects for monumental public schemes, rarely achieved, in which sculpture and architecture came together. His proposal  that Monument for an Airport could be used  to advertise Imperial Airways, as either a desk display or an outdoor sculpture, was never realised. Model for 'Torsion', however, was eventually translated into a large fountain outside St Thomas' Hospital in London. Gabo's increasing concern, from the late 1930s, with the aesthetic aspect of his work at the expense of the industrial can be seen in Model for 'Construction in Space "Crystal"'.
The heavy musculature of these female figures creates a gender ambiguity that may have implied moral degeneracy to a 19th-century audience. The contorted central body offers a parody of the graceful contraposto of classical statues, while the other cropped or truncated figures lounge about licentiously. Dante describes the thieves being bitten by snakes, creatures that Lavater associates with cunning and treachery. Here, however, the snakes appear to emanate from the womens genitals, suggesting that their criminal activity has given birth to an aberration.
During the 1940s Minton was regarded as one of the most talented artists of his generation, particularly for his skills as a draughtsman. Between 1948 and 1957 he taught at the Royal College of Art, where he advocated the tradition of figure painting. He had a charismatic but self destructive disposition and possibly identified with James Dean, the Hollywood film star, who was killed in a car accident in 1955, aged twenty-four. By the early 1950s Minton's reputation was in decline. His commitment to figure composition seemed out-dated in the face of American Abstract Expressionism. 'The Death of James Dean' was his last ambitious picture. He was found dead on 22 January 1957. The coroner's verdict was suicide.
Goeneutte painted this snowy scene at the age of only twenty-two. At the time he lived very close to the boulevard de Clichy in Paris, and he was to make a number of paintings and etchings of the buildings and people on this busy thoroughfare. The painting can be seen as a quiet celebration of the metropolitan elegance of Paris, but its title shows that Goeneutte saw the wintry weather as important element in the composition. The artist admired Manet and was a friend of Renoir in this period. In later years, however, his choice of subjects and style were both relatively traditional.
This is one of the earliest known works by Marcus Gheeraerts II. It is dated 1592 (top left). It is thought to show a member of the Harington family of Kelston, near Bath. She may be Mary Rogers, wife of the author and translator Sir John Harington, Elizabeth Is godson.In her left hand she holds strings of pearls threaded into four knots. These, and the distinctive black and white pattern on her sleeves and bodice, echo the Harington heraldic arms. Her body is defined by her long, slender, stiffened, pointed bodice, evident in many of Gheeraertss portraits of the 1590s.
Auerbach has worked in Camden Town, north London, since 1954. This is the largest of his extensive sequence of paintings depicting the area outside his studio. The brushwork is looser than the earlier version in this gallery, and the palette is lighter and bolder. During the 1980s, Auerbach's presentation of space became more literal, creating an illusionistic sense of depth.
From about 1910 Strang painted a series of large group portraits. These were of his friends, family and models, posed in imaginary modern settings. They illustrated social relations between the sexes, and the figures were dressed in extremes of  fashion. Strang invites the viewer to speculate as to what exactly is going on in this scene.
Abstract painting gave me a desire to use three-dimensional materials and this first essay was based on the same concept I had used in painting, Martin wrote. I took a simple element (in this case a parallelepiped  a solid figure whose faces are six parallelograms) and subjected it to a system of changes, not knowing what would happen to it. I think all my work has been based on this kind of curiosity. The composition was determined by a complex layering of geometrical relationships, in this case based on the Golden Section.
Piccadilly Circus was Londons busiest intersection and by 1910 was already dominated by its famous illuminated advertisements. Here Ginner captures the brashness and bustle of this epitome of the modern city. The feeling that the flower seller is imprisoned by motor cars and buses is emphasised by the low view point of the composition, while the passing bus advertises the latest music hall show.
Gallery label, August 2004
This picture illustrates the traditional story of a man trying to choose between two women. The Highland Sergeant turns away from his rather sullen-looking companion and looks at the woman speaking to him, indicating that he has made his choice.This is a reworking of James Tissots painting The Thames which shocked audiences when it was shown at the Royal Academy in 1876 because of the questionable sexual morals of its characters. This painting was exhibited as a corrective.
Hendricks made four paintings featuring George Jules Taylor, one of his former students at Yale University. The other paintings showed him dressed in contemporary fashions, while this one depicts him nude except for his glasses. Hendricks was already a well-known African-American painter, and his decision to place a naked black male figure in the position of the traditional female odalisque was extremely radical. As the title underlines, the painting confronts white fears and sexual stereotypes surrounding the black male. These issues are heightened by a realistic representational style that went against contemporary trends in black American art.
Moore carved a disembodied head in alabaster in 1923 and a small mask in 1924. But it was not until 1928 that he showed a serious interest in the making of masks. In that year Moore bought a French book on pre-Columbian sculpture which included many illustrations of masks. During 1928-9 Moore made eight masks, four cast in concrete and four carved in stone. In this stone mask the eyes, nostrils and mouth are holes which have been drilled right through the material. This device of drilling a hole points to future developments in Moore's work because the sculptor came to believe that 'A hole can have as much shape-meaning as a solid mass.'
This elegant and ornamental portrait
Marmaduke Cradock was one of the few British-born painters of birds and animals active in the late-17th century. This composition of turkeys, rock doves, a peacock and a jay shows the artists careful observation of birds. The calm of the dovecote is disturbed by the danger of a predatory fox. However, the central focus of the painting is the peacock, a rare and exotic bird which could have been observed in London parks. Its rich and colourful plumage speaks of wealth and opulence.
The Biblical figure Mary Magdalene was one of the followers of Jesus. Traditionally presented as a former prostitute, she is one of the principal archetypes for the representation of female sexuality in western art  a tradition that Dumas subtly undermines in this series of highly individual portraits. I liked the fact that this woman wants this man and he says no. My men are often supposedly feminine while my women are more masculine (if you want to use these distinctions still), Dumas has said. I use religious subjects as I use fairy-tale figures, in order to give my audience an easy starting point, a popular reference that relates to all times and that is familiar to most people.
Scenes of rural poverty and philanthropic kindness were a feature of British art in the latter part of the 18th century. This painting is unusual in featuring identifiable contemporaries rather than generic figures. The well-dressed sitters are the children of Sir Francis Ford a wealthy plantation owner and politician. Facing calls for the abolition of the slave trade, pro-slavery campaigners would claim that the poor in England lived worse lives than slaves in the West Indies. This painting may well be intended to draw attention to that idea.
This drawing was made just at the end of the  First World War. Schwitters' gallery in Berlin,  Der Sturm, promoted Expressionist artists and early in his career Schwitters was influenced by the movement. The jagged and claustrophobic space of the drawing echoes Expressionist style. The angled planes, arches and curves suggest  an urban setting.
Hesse trained as a painter but, in the mid-1960s, experimented with making reliefs like this one, and began to use materials such as wool and string. This development was prompted by the difficulties she was having in translating her often complex drawings into painting. From making reliefs, Hesse naturally gravitated towards sculpture. This is one of Hesses earliest relief works and, like others of the time, is characterised by semi-organic shapes and trailing linear elements.
Kossoff's principal subjects are his immediate  family and friends and the parts of London which he knows best. In the 1960s he set up a studio in Willesden, north London and in 1967 a swimming pool opened close by. He began taking his son there to teach him to swim, and the pool and its space provided him with a new subject. He made four large paintings of the pool between 1969 and 1972 of which this is one. All are distinguished by a lightness of touch and a sense of movement, noise and space.
This work celebrates an important event in the history of London: the building of Westminster Bridge. The bridge, shown near completion, was the first to be built over the Thames in over 600 years. During the 11 years of its construction it was painted by many artists, including Canaletto and Richard Wilson. The arrival of Canaletto in England in 1746 may have stimulated Scott to compete by producing similar views of London scenery, particularly along the Thames. Like Canaletto, Scott has included lively figures, shown here swimming, drinking ale and peeping through the balustrade.
This image epitomizes the way Nashs work links Surrealism to an earlier British romanticism. It was made as an illustration to Thomas Browne's seventeenth-century essay Urne Buriall (on display close by). Another version of this drawing was also included in the International Surrealist Exhibition in London in 1936. Brownes mystical treatise meditates on death and immortality. Nashs drawing is based on a loose interpretation of the text. It shows, in Nashs words, 'aerial habitations where the soul like 

a bird or some such aerial creature roamed at will'
This small but complex structure is based loosely on the human figure. It was made in a period when Giacometti looked at late Cubist works and so-called primitive art, exploring different ways of representing the figure. Here the male and female figures are `transparent constructions' (to use Giacometti's phrase), composed of simplified rhyming shapes. Comparison with related pieces by the artist suggests that at least one of the hemispheres may be read as a head, while the zig-zag lines were intended to signify the female form.
Rothenstein made a number of portraits of his family and close friends in which the interior is as important as the figure. In this painting the artists wife Alice is shown with their first child John, aged about two. The interior is the familys house in Hampstead. Without any narrative intent, the painting can be interpreted as a simple celebration of motherhood. Rothenstein greatly admired seventeenth-century Dutch painting, and the colouring, lighting and pervading stillness evidently owes a debt to Dutch painter Jan Vermeer.
At the beginning of the 1980s, Marden adopted  a fluid and expressive style that was influenced  by Eastern mysticism and calligraphy. He  painted loose serpentine curves and made  marks resembling hieroglyphs, that he  joined into vertical columns. The resulting  webs evoke crystal structures or a mesh of  roots and branches. Marden's paintings are  often the result of a studied contemplation of nature: 'You are observing nature and yet you  are just trying to respond to it. When you draw  a tree you get a certain kind of energy just  by drawing the way it grows.'
Gallery label, July 2008
Butler's maquette was the winning entry in the international competition for a monument to 'The Unknown Political Prisoner'. After his original maquette was severely damaged, Butler made two replicas. This work was made between 1955 and 1956 and represents Butler's vision of a monument to 'The Unknown Political Prisoner' in its most fully developed form. Four times larger than the maquettes, it was welded from pieces of steel forged by the artist. It includes details such as the ladder-like structure which climbs one of the legs of the tower. Several leading Germans, including the mayor of Berlin were keen to see the monument built in West Berlin, although this ambition was never realised.
These sculptural objects made of porcelain are hung on the wall as if they were paintings. For the artist, the idea of a blank sheet of paper encourages creative or imaginative thought on the part of the viewer. When facing a work like this, people may feel as if they were writing all their feelings in the real world on it, not with pens but with their hearts, he has said. The contemplation of a blank sheet also relates to Buddhist philosophy, in which concepts of space and non-space, and fullness and emptiness, are intertwined.
This image comes from a larger body of work  in which the artist depicted three young female friends in various settings in and around two houses, Francis Place and Mulberry Lodge. While conforming in some respects to the conventions  of portraiture, the detached expression of the girl in this photograph, the lack of narrative content, and the contrast between her casual clothing and pose and the pristine interior of this upper-middle class home, create an unsettling effect.
According to Greek mythology, the nymph Callisto was transformed into a bear when she broke her vow of chastity by falling in love with the god Zeus. After her death, Zeus carried her to the heavens where she became the constellation of the Great Bear. Auerbach's setting for the legend is Hampstead Heath, in north London. This painting was commissioned by the collector David Wilkie, who wanted a work inspired by Titian. Auerbach responded with a subject that might have appealed to the Renaissance master.
In this apocalyptic image, an exploding shell illuminates the battlefield like a star. Nevinson had been closely associated with the Futurist and Vorticist movements, which celebrated the machine age, but his wartime paintings bear witness to the destructive power of technology. Here the man-made explosion lends the landscape a visionary quality. This is almost certainly one of the works Nevinson painted in 1916, after he was invalided out of the Royal Army Medical Corps.
Home of the Welder was made shortly after the Second World War, and reflects Smiths personal circumstances. He had just been released from his wartime job as a welder, which he believed had restricted his creative work. Like a coded autobiography, various elements in this sculpture relate to his dreams and frustrations at the time. The millstone, for example, was identified by Smith as representing his job, while images of women and children may reflect tensions in his childless first marriage.
Monet executed several scenes of the Seine near his house at Giverny. He probably began each canvas in a specially adapted flat-bottomed boat, but would have continued working on paintings in his studio over a period of time. Monet has stripped this scene of physical detail, focusing, instead, on recording the all-enveloping light and atmosphere of the river. In 1891 he said, 'For me, a landscape does not exist in its own right, since its appearance changes at every moment; but the surrounding atmosphere brings it to life - the air and the light, which vary continuously. For me, it is only the surrounding atmosphere which gives subjects their true value.'
The sorceress Medea was jilted by Jason, and slew their children to spite him. Here she performs an incantation. Ingredients for her spell are scattered on the ground to the left. She appears again above, fleeing Corinth in a chariot, and hurling her murdered children behind her.
This work was reproduced in black and white in Circle. Its stage-like interleaving of coloured planes reflects Pipers engagement with abstract aesthetics. Though Piper is more commonly thought of as a painter of historical architecture and the landscape, for a short period he was intimately involved in the avant-garde. This was evident in his association with Axis, a groundbreaking journal of abstract art, which was edited by his wife Myfanwy Evans. Piper had strong links with artists abroad and his own collection included works by painters Piet Mondrian and Jean Helion, as well as the American sculptor Alexander Calder.
Cornells glazed boxes contain assemblages of found objects that have mysterious and poetic associations. This work is dedicated to Giuditta Pasta, a nineteenth-century Italian opera singer. Cornell idolised a number of almost-forgotten stars of the ballet and opera, who epitomised for him the ideals of the Romantic era. The box includes astronomical charts and two balls balanced on rods, which suggest planets orbiting the sun. This astronomical theme may relate to a contemporary account, which Cornell kept among his cuttings, in which Pastas voice is described as evoking the beauty of the night sky.
Gallery label, September 2004
This domestic interior depicts the dining room in Pissarro's house at Osny, near Pontoise in the French countryside not far from Paris. The child shown sitting at the table is the artist's fourth son, Ludovic Rodolphe. Pissarro spent much of his life near Pontoise and several of his paintings depict the surrounding landscape and its inhabitants. In this picture he used the typical Impressionist device of cutting off objects at the edges of the painting, such as the table, chairs and the prints on the wall, in order to give the composition a sense of informality and immediacy. The small, feathery brushstrokes prefigure Pissarro's later Neo-Impressionist or Divisionist paintings.
This does not apparently show a scene from  one of Davidson's plays, but is instead a series  of caricatures of notable figures of the day. At  the centre, the cloaked figure is Sir Augustus  Harris, the manager of the Covent Garden, Drury  Lane and Her Majesty's theatres. A corpulent Oscar  Wilde is portrayed as Bacchus, and beside him the  nude woman is Beardsley's sister Mabel, an  actress. The faun is Henry Harland, literary  editor of the 'Yellow Book', the masked figure is  the poet Richard Le Gallienne, and the ballerina  is the dancer Adeline Genee.
Gallery label, December 2004
Giles Lytton Strachey (1880-1932) was a critic and biographer who established a reputation with his book 'Eminent Victorians', published in 1918. He was one of the members of the so-called Bloomsbury Group, which included the writer Virginia Woolf and the painters Roger Fry, Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant. Lamb painted a small portrait of Strachey in his studio in the Vale of Health, Hampstead in 1912, and then painted this grand larger version two years later. Strachey once said that he was unable to lift a match before breakfast and this portrait shows him in a typically languid pose.
Spoerri called his relief works tableaux-piges (picture-traps), because they involved fixing or 'snaring' objects found in chance positions on table tops or in drawers. These were hung vertically on a wall, like conventional pictures, and were intended to create visual discomfort in the viewer. In this work, the remains of a meal are preserved on a wooden board that the artist used as a table while living in a small room in a Paris hotel. The title derives from the book by the Swiss poet Robert Walser (Dichtungen in Prosa, or 'Poems in Prose').
In making this painting McKenna was very aware of the importance of the oak tree as an English national symbol, and of pictures of single trees by other artists such as Courbet, Crome and Caspar David Friedrich. The artist made drawings of a particular oak tree in Dulwich Park, south London, and developed the painting from them. The landscape background is imaginary. 'An English Oak Tree' is a pair with one of a beech tree in a large park in Brussels, painted at the same time. McKenna has painted several pictures of city parks, being interested in their combination of the natural and the man-made.
Soto left Venezuela for Paris in 1950 where, influenced by Piet Mondrians late works, he set out to make paintings that appeared to move. His interest in the transformation of matter into energy led him to create a series of reliefs he called vibrations. In these works, layers of lines, either static or mobile, produce an optical disturbance. In Cardinal a cascade of stems hangs in front of a striped background, gently swinging with the air around it. This movement is enhanced by the optical effects of the rods against the hand-drawn lines.
Furse has presented Diana, goddess of the hunt, in a contemporary setting. The model was his wife Katherine, who recalled Charles had the design of the wind-blown figure in his mind and knew exactly what he wished to produce He was very anxious to see the whole effect, so I dressed up and my stepmother-in-law Gertude was brought in to help the wind. Katherine Furse carved the frame, and later led a distinguished career as Director of the Womens Royal Naval Service. The picture enjoyed great contemporary success, and was used in many advertisements at the time.
This work belongs to a series that Lee made by painting long downward lines until the paint on the brush is used up. He then returned to the top and started again. Describing his method, Lee wrote: Load the brush and draw a line. At the beginning it will appear dark and thick, then it will get gradually thinner and finally disappear ... A line must have a beginning and an end. Space appears within the passage of time, and when the process of creating space comes to an end, time also vanishes.
This work was made in a park in Amsterdam. It is concerned with illusion and reality, the difference between what the camera sees and what the eye sees. As its title suggests, Dibbets wanted to 'correct' the recessive perspective of a large area of ground. He decided to use light coloured rope that would clearly mark off a cross shaped area of grass. He used much thicker rope for the two top, more distant, right-angles, so that they would appear to be in the same plane as those at the bottom of the photograph. The nearest right angles are approximately eight inches long, whereas those farthest away are each over thirty feet long. Grass was chosen because it did not have obvious perspectival references.
These collages are mainly made from magazines given to Paolozzi by American ex-servicemen. They show his fascination with popular culture and technology, as well as with the glamour of American consumerism. The title of the series refers to Henry Ford''s famous statement that ''History is more or less bunk.... We want to live in the present''. It reflects Paolozzi''s belief that his work should respond to contemporary culture.
From 1931-33 McWilliam lived and worked in Paris.  On his return to London he worked in an  independent manner but was in close contact with  the British artists Henry Moore, Paul Nash and  Roland Penrose. The International Surrealist  Exhibition of 1936 made a significant impact on  him and, during 1939-40, he made a striking series  of carvings in wood and stone which he entitled  'The Complete Fragment'. These carvings were  mostly part or parts of the human head, greatly  enlarged and complete in themselves. McWilliam was  interested in the interplay between solid volume  and surrounding space in these works, and also how  the viewer completes the 'missing' parts of the  sculpture in the mind's eye.
This small painting was used as the basis for Abstract Painting No. 439, also in this display. I do not paint the oil sketches with the intention of using them for the big smooth pictures, but I subsequently use some of the sketches as patterns for big pictures, Richter has said. The oil sketches look as if they had been painted quickly, but they often take longer than the big paintings, as they are altered from time to time to look as heterogeneous as possible.
This work exemplifies Lanyons idea of the experiential landscape, which involved approaching a place from different positions and combining these views with allusions to geology, history, culture and myth. Here he depicts the fishing port of Porthleven from several perspectives, revealing its two harbours and clock tower. Lanyon later identified a human presence in the work, reading the shape on the left as a fisherman with lamp and his wife wrapped in a shawl on the right. Influenced by the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung and his theories of the unconscious, the artist saw these as figures embodying the cultural identity of his home.
John Linnell was a pioneer of the new observational landscape painting of the early 19th century. By 1811, he was sharing a house with the painter William Mulready at Kensington Gravel Pits, near the Bayswater Road. Linnell and Mulready sat down before any common object and tried to imitate it minutely. Linnell studied the gravel workings in a series of carefully observed watercolours completed out of doors. This picture, with its careful observation of the surface textures of the ground, brilliant lighting and vivid sky, was developed from the watercolours.
Best known for his huge and absurd animated constructions of junk, Tinguely also made small sculptures exploring particular ideas. Here the kind of hand tools he customarily employed are brought together in an electrically-driven three dimensional collage. The appearance of movement and the beat are coordinated in a syncopated way so that the illusion of irregularity is created. The actions of the tools appear purposeful but are pointless in functional terms. Tinguely perhaps had in mind the obsolescence created by mechanical progress. This elegant work is animated by the colourful handles of the tools as well as by movement and sound.
This is an early example of Kitaj's many paintings  on the theme of the unjust infliction of human  suffering. Its ostensible subject is the murder in  1919 of the Jewish agitator and theoretician Rosa  Luxemburg, who was killed by troops opposed to the  revolutionary movement that swept Germany in the  wake of the First World War. In the centre of this  painting a figure holds Luxemburg's corpse, while  at top right is a collaged transcription of an  account of the murder. Kitaj associated Luxemburg  with his grandmother Helene, who was forced to  flee Vienna in the 1930s. The veiled figure at top  left represents his maternal grandmother, who  fled Russia as a result of earlier pogroms of the  Jewish people.
This group portrait was commissioned by John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute, who served as Prime Minister (17623). Butes sons have abandoned their game of archery to go bird-nesting. On the left in blue is William Stuart, who would later become Archbishop of Armagh. Sitting in the tree is Charles Stuart, later a Lieutenant General in the army. The setting for the portrait is Butes country estate, Luton Park, Bedfordshire, which he acquired in 1763. The painting displays both Butes progeny and his position as an important landowner.
Since the early 1990s Sarah Lucas  has challenged sexual stereotypes in  a variety of provocative works. In this  series of self-portraits she turns against the art-historical tradition of the female seductress or muse, and presents  herself in a deliberately androgynous,  and occasionally aggressive, series of poses. She adopts masculine gestures  and stances, and shows herself in unisex clothing like jeans and T-shirts. These images also raise questions about the  role and appearance of the modern  artist. In contrast to the clich of the  artist as an anguished male, Lucas  shows herself as an ordinary person  in emphatically ordinary surroundings.
Gwen John made numerous versions of this painting,  some nearly identical and others with differing  poses or costumes. The sitter was a neighbour of  John's in Meudon, near Paris. Although she was the  artist's most frequently used model, she is rarely  mentioned in John's correspondence, and her name  is unknown. She is sometimes referred to as 'the  Convalescent' after the series of paintings of  that name for which she posed, one of which hangs  nearby.
Gallery label, September 2004
Lucien Pissarro was the eldest son of the  French Impressionist artist, Camille Pissarro.  As an artist, he was greatly influenced both  by his father and, for a period, Georges Seurat.  He moved to England in 1890, and was a founder member of the Camden Town Group in 1911. He became a British citizen in 1916, but liked to call himself a 'Channel painter'. In this landscape Pissarro is concerned with the play of light  on snow, and contrasting tones. Pissarro lived  mostly in London, but this picture was made  at Coldharbour, near Dorking, in Surrey.
This shows one of the rubbing-down houses on Newmarket Heath racecourse, where the sweating horses were dried, or 'rubbed-down', after exercise. Only one other pure landscape by Stubbs, a view of the same rubbing-down house from a different angle, survives. Both were frequently referred to by him when painting the backgrounds for his portraits of famous racehorses. His studio sale included many items under the heading 'Drawings, Drawing Books, Studies from Nature, Sketches, &c.' It is not known, however, whether a study such as this was made outdoors or painted from a preliminary drawing.
Wentworth uses common and utilitarian objects in his sculptures in a way that can be both witty and unsettling. He has observed 'humour is trying to find pockets of breathable air in a stifling atmosphere'. Wentworth gave up making sculpture for a while in the 1970s, thinking that it had become 'as dry as broken biscuits'. He emphasised the difficulties in making sculpture when saying 'I hate the way I work, the anxiety in waiting for enthusiasm to meet method, material to meet image, idea to meet language'. As an inveterate collector of discarded objects, Wentworth regards their presence in his studio as enabling him to create an imaginative order rather than one which is typecast.
Here, Turner seems to be working  towards a romantic or literary subject akin  to his Shakespearean Jessica which was exhibited  in 1830 and is exactly the same size. Both works are in a style indebted to Rembrandt, and Turner could also have been exploring parallels with exotic women painted by Rembrandt. Moreover the narrative being developed here, seemingly  of a letter concealed by one woman from another, may have been associated with that of his earlier Rembrandt's Daughter, in which the painter interrupts his daughter while she is reading  a love letter.
Home Again was painted in the final year of the Crimean War. The British Public had followed the two-year conflict between Britain and Russia in the popular press; with this painting Collinson satisfied the demand for staged homecomings.A weary soldier wearing the uniform of the Coldstream Guards is returning home to his rural cottage. When it was first exhibited a quotation beside the painting explained that the soldier had been discharged because of an accident leading to blindness. As a consequence, the family now faced a bleak future.
Constant originally titled this work To Us, Liberty, believing that it encapsulated the spirit of creative freedom that accompanied the founding of the CoBrA group in 1948. The prominent use of red, white and blue allude to the French tricolour flag, and its revolutionary values of Liberty, Equality and Brotherhood. Several years later, after the collapse of CoBrA, Constant re-titled the work to reflect his disillusionment: I changed the title to express my doubts about the possibility of free art in an unfree society, and, at the same time, my hopes for the freedom all men are looking for.
Carrington was fascinated by the Andalusian landscape and made studies for this painting at Yegen, a town with spectacular views of the Sierra Nevada mountain range and across the sea to Africa. She wrote of the works inspired by her visits: They transport me into another world. I cannot express quite what a relief it is. Despite being based on direct observation, Carrington made this painting back in Britain and the play with scale  between the mountain ranges, the four riders and the cacti in the foreground  gives it a dream-like quality.
In his corridor pieces, Naumans sculpture assumes the dimensions of architecture. The spaces are often claustrophobic yet they seem to extend indefinitely, like a corridor seen in a dream. Here, the sense of infinite extension is created by a mirror set at an angle at the end of the corridor. The width of the corridor has been narrowed so that it is impossible to walk through it, thereby heightening the sense of eerie isolation.
In this brooding landscape the trees and  their tendril-like branches threaten to invade  the viewer's space. The dark colours and evening light give the painting a claustrophobic atmosphere. Like his brother Paul, John Nash had served with the Artists' Rifles for two years before becoming  an Official War Artist in 1918. This painting, completed soon after the war, is characterised  by a sense of bleak desolation that suggests  the profound introspection that for many  followed the devastation of the war.
This is one of a small group of paintings of youths by Modigliani. The artist inscribed the work's title on the bottom right of the canvas, identifying the sitter as a 'peasant boy'. However, the same model appears in a painting in the collection of the Louvre, Paris, titled 'The Young Apprentice'. Modigliani had long been deeply influenced by the painter Paul Czanne (1839-1906), and it seems likely that this painting was a homage to the latter's series of country workers posed centrally in the canvas and painted in predominantly blue tones. (See, for example, Czanne's 'The Gardener Vallier', also in this room.)
Lger was closely involved with the Peace Movement at the height of the Cold War. Together with Picasso, he attended the Communist-sponsored Peace Congress in Poland in August 1948. The Acrobat and his Partner was completed only months before and captures the circus as a symbol of the energy of modern life and popular entertainment. He wrote of this painting: I work less by reflection than by instinct. He strove to balance the dynamic and the static. Here the partner holding the ladder provides the stability for the energetic movement of the acrobat and his disc.
Gallery label, September 2004
Maria Bicknell was a daughter of the Solicitor to the Admiralty. Her grandfather was the rector of East Bergholt, where Constable first met her in 1800. The two fell in love in 1809 but, partly because of the rector's opposition, did not marry until 1816. Constable painted Marias portrait in July 1816, about three months before their marriage. In August Constable wrote to Maria from Suffolk: I would not be without your portrait for the world the sight of it soon calms my spirit under all trouble. Twelve years later Maria died from tuberculosis, leaving seven young children to Constables care.
Arman first presented debris as art in his poubelle (dustbin) works in 1959. The objects in this piece are from his first wife's bathroom and are mounted on an ornamental base from his father's antique shop. Objects of intimate personal use have been selected precisely because of their base quality, and are literally 'elevated' on a plinth to become art. Arman raises questions about value, bringing private life into the public domain. Here, he also examines the image of woman constructed by society.
This sculpture is one of three large heads which Davies made in 1983-4. Although similar, the personality and expression of each of these heads is different. Photographs of the artist's studio at that time show other small sculptures depicting men on ladders and ropes. The artist considers the large heads to have been an 'audience' for the 'human circus' suggested in the other works. Scale is an important aspect of Davies's work. He has added that the small figures always felt distant. In contrast, the large scale of the heads gave an impression of extreme proximity. As this work shows, enlarged scale also emphasises the physical presence of the subject.
This is a portrait of the artist's third son, aged seven. Unlike many other Impressionists, Camille Pissarro was concerned in his portraits to convey in a traditional manner something of the individual character of his sitters. Here he has captured his son in a pensive, as well as slightly bored or frustrated, attitude. His son went on to be a painter and engraver, but died at the age of only twenty-three from tuberculosis while living at Kew, London.
Wilson Steer, one of the most impressionist of British painters, posed his nudes in everyday settings, and here the model is playfully trying on a hat she has found in the studio. Steer did not exhibit this sketch, and it was chosen for the Tate Gallery directly from his studio in 1941, by the then Director Sir John Rothenstein. Steer told him friends told me it was spoiled by the hat; they thought it indecent that a nude should be wearing a hat, so its never been shown.
Gilbert and George started their collective practice with performance and went on to make multi-part photographic pieces like this. Here, they seem to show an ambivalent attitude towards national identity as their confrontational poses are juxtaposed with the more playful gargoyle-like crouching figures above a faded Tudor rose in the centre. This work is part of a series of over 100 photo-works collectively titled Modern Fears produced between 1980 and 1981, which focus on the death and decay they saw as permeating the urban environment.
Gallery label, July 2008
Matisse painted numerous views of Notre-Dame, which he could see from his studio window in Paris. The cathedral glows in the sunlight, and a glancing shadow indicates that it is midday. By contrast, the river beneath is dark and richly coloured. A plume of smoke from the riverboats rises in front of the cathedral, linking the industrial and spiritual aspects of the city. This atmospheric detail echoes Impressionism. However, the painting's touches of strong, sometimes seemingly arbitrary colour, anticipate Matisse's later Fauvist work.
Alfred Wallis spent most of his working life as a fisherman but by the time he was discovered in St Ives by Ben Nicholson and Christopher Wood in 1928 he had become a rag and bone merchant. He began painting at the age of seventy to keep himself company. Wallis painted memories of deep sea fishing boats which were no longer in use. He also painted landscapes based on the surrounding area. Nicholson and Wood were impressed by the directness of Wallis's work, his use of irregular shaped pieces of cardboard as a support and ground, and the object-like quality of the paintings. The discovery of Wallis encouraged them to pursue further their adoption of a 'naive' vision.
Motherwell wrote of this painting 'I almost never  start with an image. I start with a painting idea,  an impulse, usually derived from my own world.  Though images may sometimes emerge from some chord  in my unconscious, the way a dream might. In  'Iberia', for example, you would have to know that  a Spanish bull ring is made of sand of an ocher  colour, and that Spanish bulls are very small,  quick and coal black'. This picture is 'an  equivalence of the ferocity of the whole  encounter'. Motherwell painted a series of elegies  for the Spanish Republic, which was defeated in  the Spanish Civil War. In these paintings, as in  'Iberia No. 2', black symbolised death and  anxiety. Here it threatens to engulf the land.
These photos were taken by the artist John Coplans of his own gnarled and wrinkled body.
This is one of three paintings by Ford Madox Brown illustrating Shakespeares play King Lear. This scene shows Lear with his youngest daughter, Cordelia, on the right. Lears doctor orders the musicians to play more loudly and awaken him. But Cordelia is anxious that her ailing father should sleep and she speaks the lament inscribed on the paintings frame. In the play Lear divides his kingdom between his other two daughters and their husbands. But, after a painful period of self-discovery, he realises that Cordelia is his only true loving child.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
Wedged between the sections of a vaulting box are representations of a wheeled plough, a book, a clocking-in machine and a box with radiation hazard markings. This succession of objects symbolises human progress, creating what Woodrow calls 'a section through history'. At the top of the precarious structure sits the figure of Humpty Dumpty who, according to the nursery rhyme, 'sat on a wall' and 'had a great fall'. The ironic title English Heritage reflects Woodrow''s discomfort with the amount of jingoism in Britain during the 1980s, as well as a desire to question what actually constitutes his own heritage.
This portrait was painted at Bethlem Royal Hospital in London, although the sitter is unknown. He could be one of the attendants in charge of the inmates at the hospital. The sunflower is possibly an allusion to the god Osiris (with whom Dadd was obsessed) who was traditionally identified with the sun. The bright red fez (a type of oriental cap) may be the one Dadd himself wore on his travels in the Middle East.
Jules Olitski was one of the principal exponents of Colour Field painting, which involved using flat expanses of colour, and rejecting illusions of depth and the emphatic brushwork of Abstract Expressionism. Olitski's large scale canvases are covered in delicate mists of colour that give the works an all-over unity and a sense of continuation beyond the frame. The paintings have an ethereal quality, appearing to dematerialise the canvas surface. Olitski said he would prefer 'nothing but some colours sprayed into the air and staying there.'
Images from the popular press of the then-president of Colombia enjoying himself at parties were the starting point for this work. Apparently oblivious to the violence perpetrated by his government  which included arbitrary detentions and torture  
Julio Csar Turbay Ayala was regularly pictured enthusiastically drinking, mingling and dancing. Gonzlez translated this imagery into a repeating pattern, collaborating with a textile factory to produce 140 metres of curtain fabric which was then sold off by the metre. The work becomes both a marketable commodity and a metaphor for corruption hiding behind the curtain of public image.
Although best known for his monumental sculptures, Bourdelle also produced a number of busts and portraits. Sir James George Frazer (1854-1941) was an eminent anthropologist, whose widely-read book The Golden Bough (1890) traced recurrent patterns in the myths and religious practices of early cultures around the world. This bust was originally painted, reflecting Bourdelles interest in the polychromatic sculpture of the ancient Greeks. Frazer himself wrote I dont know if in fact my face has all that gravity, all that philosophical profundity; but... I should be glad if after my death this portrait alone was kept and all the others destroyed.

Antoine Bourdelle was born in Montauban, France, in 1861 and died near Paris in 1929.
Csar was a key figure in the French 1960s  movement known as Nouveau Ralisme. This aimed to  engage directly with reality through using  everyday artefacts rather than traditional art  materials. In the early 1960s Csar made  sculptures from machine-crushed pieces of metal.  They were known as 'compressions'. From 1965 he  worked on a series known as 'expansions', and  experimented with what were for him new materials,  such as glass fibre and polyester resin. This  'thumb', made for an exhibition on the theme of  the hand, was based on a lifesize cast of his own  thumb, scaled up using the machines traditionally  employed by sculptors to enlarge their works.  Csar made several, increasingly large versions of  this work.
Gaddafi 2 is one of three paintings by Sasnal based on images that emerged in the media following the death of Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Here he homes in on a group of rebel fighters, apparently looking down onto the corpse, which cannot be seen due to the close cropping of the image. One of the figures appears to be filming the event. Due to the increased availability of mobile technology, significant moments in history are now routinely captured by bystanders and posted online. Sasnal further mediates such images by translating them into paintings.
Apollo was one of the gods who lived on  Mount Olympus. He was the sun god, and  the Romans believed that he rode his fiery  chariot drawn by four horses across the sky  each day. Here, one of the priestesses of  a Roman temple of Apollo looks rapturously upwards towards the sun. Alma-Tadema  changed this picture extensively from his first design. The lines of a room now show through  the thin paint of the walls to the left and right of the figure, and what is probably a marble bench  is still visible to the immediate left of the figure.
'Vicissitudes' was made by glueing together paintings on paper that the artist had allowed to accumulate on the floor of his studio. Their chance arrangements and overlappings gave Dubuffet the idea of cutting up the pieces and using them to make assemblages. It belongs to a series of about a hundred collages to which the artist gave the collective title 'Theatres of Memory'. This was because they combined evocations of a number of different places and scenes.
Spencer was a devout Christian and believed God resided in all things and the miraculous could be found in everyday events. In his paintings, Cookham  the small town on the Thames where he lived  becomes the setting for scenes from the life of Christ and other Christian narratives. This is one of a series of scenes from the Passion of Christ. Carpenters walking down Cookham High Street form a link with Christs carrying the cross through Jerusalem.
During the 1970s, Ian Breakwell was living in a flat overlooking Smithfield Market in the City of London. From his window, he began to take photographs of an old man he often saw walking around the market below. Although the man appeared to be walking purposefully, he never seemed to be going anywhere in particular.
Painted on a piece of cardboard attached to part of a wooden crate, Ulysses dates from a period when Motherwell was attracted to Surrealism and experimented with various types of automatism. This painting is named after James Joyce's modernist novel Ulysses, whose stream of consciousness technique involved transcribing the free flow of an individuals thoughts. Joyce's style of writing had a profound effect on Motherwell, who believed that art should be an expression of the innermost thoughts and feelings of the artist.
This was originally a relatively naturalistic portrait of a man pointing to a skull, the traditional reminder of death. After it was returned unsold, Picabia chose to obliterate the features of the face, transforming it into a void overlaid with strange symbols that may have been derived from medieval Catalan frescos. Picabia surrounded his figure with sexually-suggestive hanging objects based on these symbols, while the horns are a reference to cuckoldry. The misleading date 1925 was also painted in later, reflecting Picabias subversive sense of humour.
Among the most striking features of this  portrait is Mrs. Beckford's lavish sacque dress  ( la Francaise), of turquoise blue and silver watered silk, with matching silk trimmings  on the bodice. The necklace, shoulder mantle  and sleeve ruffles are of fine silk lace. Her  jewellery includes clip-on earrings (called 'snaps'), probably made of paste, and on her wrists are  two black silk bracelets mounted with portrait miniatures. Owing to the increasing pressure of business, Reynolds probably restricted his own contribution to the subject's pose and her head, leaving the detailed painting of her dress to a professional 'drapery' painter, or possibly to his young Italian studio assistant, Giuseppe Marchi.
In 1932 Hepworth travelled with Ben Nicholson to  France and there visited the studios of Brancusi,  Giacometti and Arp. With its emphasis on primary  shapes 'Three Forms' reveals the influence of  Brancusi in particular on Hepworth's work after  her return to England. Hepworth began work on this  piece after the birth of her triplets, two girls  and a boy, on 3 October 1934. She later said of  her work in this period, 'I was absorbed in the  relationships in space ... and in the tensions  between the forms'.
In 1914 Wyndham Lewis and the American poet and critic Ezra Pound launched Vorticism with the first edition of 'BLAST'. Vorticism embraced the modern world with gusto. Lewis used 'BLAST' as a vehicle for his 'attack on traditional harmony'. Through its pages he poured scorn on the taste of polite society. This composition was among the first works by Lewis to suggest the architectural and mechanistic rhythm of urban life using a distinctive abstract style. Vorticism challenged French Cubism and Italian Futurism, although its sharp-angled depiction of fragmented space owed a debt to these movements. However, Vorticism focused on the idea of the 'Vortex', the still centre where creative energy is most intense.
In 1944 Herman moved to the Welsh mining village of Ystradgynlais where he recorded the life of the miners and the village community. He noted in 1946 that although at first sight like other workers, the miner is more impressive and singular. Sometimes I thought of old Egyptian carvings walking between sky and earth, or dark rocks fashioned into glorious human shapes, or heavy logs in which a primitive hand has tried to synthesise the pride of human labour and the calm force which promises to guard its dignity.
Gallery label, September 2004
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
To make this work, Pippin overturned 

a bath tub and mounted it on a wooden stand. In complete darkness, he lined 

the bath with photographic papers and sealed the top, leaving only a pin-hole 

at the centre. He then lay naked on 

the bathroom floor while light flooded 

the room. The exposure time was 

ninety minutes.
Gallery label, September 2004
The Spanish Civil War marked a crucial political turning-point in the 1930s. General Francos rebellion against the elected left-wing government was seen as part of the wider threat posed by Fascism across Europe. Fougeron was among many Frenchmen who considered volunteering to fight in support 
of the Spanish government, but decided instead to devote his art to the cause. In Martyred Spain, the decaying body of a horse and a raped woman symbolise the innocent victims of a country devastated by conflict.
Gallery label, September 2004
Rossetti worked on this watercolour shortly after making illustrations for an edition of Tennyson's poems. Consequently its subject has been related to Tennyson's description of King Arthur's death. However Rossetti himself described it simply as 'some people playing music'. Its title is derived from the blue tiles on the walls of the room.
Gallery label, August 2004
Andrews made this work following a ten-day stay at Ayers Rock - known as Uluru to the Aborigines - in the desert of Australia's Northern Territory.  The rock embodies many of the problems and  contradictions of modern tourism. At 348m  (1,143 feet) high, it is the world's largest monolith and a major destination for tourists. Historically, however, it is a sacred site for several Aboriginal tribes and its caves contain carvings and paintings. To evoke the site's spiritual dimension Andrews has adopted the anthropomorphic convention  of suggesting human forms in the land by  accentuating the mouth-like characteristics  of a gash in the mountainside.
The title of this work can be translated as What we all lack. It derives from a quotation from the Communist philosopher Friedrich Engels used by the Surrealists on the cover of a magazine: What these gentlemen lack is dialectics. Man Rays title implies that what we lack is not so much the philosophical tool of dialectics but imagination. Here the clay pipe and glass ball suggest the childhood pastime of blowing bubbles.
In Helmet Head No.1, a protective helmet encloses a separate bronze form, which includes a nose and mouth, suggesting a face. Moore made a number of Helmet sculptures, but this one is more angular  and mechanistic than others in the series, evoking memories of the Second World War, in which soldiers and civilians alike used protective helmets and masks. It was made just as the outbreak of hostilities in Korea threatened to escalate into a wider international conflict, and may reflect Moores anxieties over the threat of nuclear war.
Gallery label, August 2004
Wood travelled to the Normandy port of Dieppe with his friend Frosca Munster, describing it in a letter to his mother as a very good painting place. Dieppe attracted many artists to depict the towns fishing fleets, including Walter Sickert and Georges Braque. In Woods picture, the influence of the nave paintings of the St Ives artist Alfred Wallis (whom Wood met in 1928) may be observed in, for example, the scale of the boat in relation to the surrounding landscape and the receding line of houses on the shore.
In the late 1930s Moore made six small Reclining Figures in lead. This is one of eight bronze casts after one of those lead originals. These sculptures relate to drawings which show that their shapes were suggested by bone or even rock formations. The relationship between body and land was of particular interest to Moore at this time since he had just completed a large 'Recumbent Figure' in green Hornton stone for the architect Serge Chermayeff's garden at Halland in Sussex. Stone could be carved to suggest cavities created by weathering; however, the medium of lead produced a different emphasis. The lead figures remind the viewer of the angular, skeletal framework underlying the human body.
Cindy Sherman''s Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artist''s earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
When they were introduced in 1818, the astronomer and artist John Varley was struck by Blakes visionary capacity. As a mutual friend put it, Varley readily devoured all the marvellous in Blakes most extravagent utterances [sic]. Varley encouraged Blake to draw the figures that appeared to him, resulting in a series of so-called visionary heads. This unusual example was then used by Varley as an illustration of Gemini in his Zodiacal Physiognomy (see the reproduction on the plinth by this showcase). Blake later developed the sketch to produce a finished tempera, hanging nearby.
Gertrude Jekyll was a well known garden designer, who often worked in collaboration with the architect Edwin Lutyens. In 1920 she was seventy-six, and quite difficult. It is said that Nicholson painted this picture of her boots while he was waiting the opportunity of a sitting, as she would only allow this in the late afternoon. However, Nicholson enjoyed finding the revelation of character in clothing. He had painted other pictures of shoes, and of a hat. The painting is dedicated 'For E.L.', and was a gift to Lutyens. Nicholson's portrait of Miss Jekyll is at the National Portrait Gallery.
Ward was born in Hereford and studied at the art school there before attending Royal Collegein London. Over the years his high reputation in portraiture has led to many prestigious commissions. He was elected Royal Academician in 1965. This painting shows Ward's two young sons, William (left) and George. It was painted at Bilting Court, the house he has lived in since the 1950s. He described the painting: 'I concocted some kind of lay figure for George, the shorter of the two boys, and I had a child lay figure for William's costume'.
Literature often provided inspiration for Hockney's early work. In the summer of 1960, the artist  discovered the homoerotic poetry of the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy. Hockney made several works based on Cavafy's imagery, culminating in the series Fourteen Illustrations for Poems from CP Cavafy (1966), which is also in the Collection. This etching is based on Cavafy's poems Alexandrian Kings and Kaisarion, which describe Kaisarion, the son of Julius Caesar and Cleopatra. Here Kaisarion stands on a cloaked figure who may be the artist himself, next to whom is a stylised Egyptian  portrait of Hockney's mother.
Gallery label, September 2004
Windsor Castle and Eton College (to the right) rise across the Thames Valley, although Turner only mentioned Slough in his original title. Given the conditions of national self-sufficiency imposed by the Napoleonic Wars, the painting has been seen as a celebration of progressive agriculture in an Arcadian English setting, beneath the benign gaze of Farmer George III. Details such as the nursing mother, the overseer with his back to us, the men attending to a broken plough and the woman bent double to grub up the turnip roots suggest a more difficult reality, and Turners sympathy for the participants.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
Steering through the glassy waters in this picture is a bragozzo, a characteristic Venetian fishing boat. The name emblazoned on the sail is the Sol di Venezia, or Sun of Venice and, laid out in a shimmering haze of colour in the distance beyond, is the city itself. Those who read Turners accompanying poem in the Royal Academy catalogue of 1843 would have found an unexpected premonition of doom contained therein. According to his verses a demon in grim repose lay in wait for the boat. Even the temperate waters of the lagoon contained dangers for those who ventured afloat.
This painting shows a view from Ludgate Circus, looking down towards St Pauls. The foreground is crowded with hansom cabs and motor buses; the horse-drawn bus being a rare sight by this time. A steam train crosses Ludgate Hill railway bridge above. (This was demolished in 1990 to make way for the Thameslink.) Blanche painted many views of London, where he kept a studio from 1905. He used a four-wheeled vehicle as an extra studio from which he could make finished pictures of the city.
This is an unfinished work in the square format used by Turner in the 1840s, usually for exhibited pairs of paintings. The subject, a river landscape with a bridge, might be an Italian scene, but this remains unclear. The use of areas of pale, contrasting colour to denote the features of the landscape is somewhat reminiscent of the unfinished colour studies Turner made in watercolour, known as colour beginnings.
Gallery label, August 2004
Pisces was based on an image from Les Mains libres (Free Hands), a suite of drawings that Man Ray published with poems by Paul Eluard in 1937. In these drawings my hands are dreaming, he later remarked. The woman lies alongside a fish to create what the artist described as a contrasting of similar and different forms at the same time. Man Ray strengthened the identification of woman and fish by choosing Pisces, the zodiac sign of paired fishes, as the English title.
Gallery label, September 2004
The Blides (or Fireballs) are a series of sculptural objects, which Oiticica referred to as Trans-Objects, in which colour is apparently inflamed by light and therefore embodies energy. Originally designed to be handled, they frequently incorporate raw earth or pigment in powdered form and other inexpensive, everyday or organic materials such as shells. This large Box Blide includes a series of drawers or panels which are pulled out to reveal their contents or the different colours in which they are painted.
Two sheets of steel are delicately balanced. One stands upright, 2.6 m high and 1.3 m deep, and balances on an edge 5 cm wide. The other rests horizontally on this thin edge, with its only other means of support provided by its minimum contact with the wall. This large, heavy work dominates the space in which in stands, both physically and psychologically through the anxiety it provokes in the viewer.
This representation of an historical event contains a number of errors. William's fleet had indeed been beaten back to base in October 1688 but on 1 November sailed in perfect weather, landing on 5 November. Like various earlier Dutch-inspired compositions, this, too, carries a political message connected with Anglo-Dutch relations. Here, Turner criticises again British non-intervention in the Belgian revolt, which was to lead to the termination in 1839 of the United Netherlands. In the Academy catalogue Turner added a curious note about the Prince having sailed his yacht, not a frigate - a confusion with his arrival in a yacht for his wedding to Princess Mary on 4th (!) November 1677.
During the late 1950s Giacometti made a number of fragmentary figures, their arms partly or entirely missing. Their slender, emaciated forms convey a vivid but fragile human presence. The writer  Jean Genet commented: 'The resemblance of  his figures to each other seems to me to represent that precious point at which human beings are confronted with the most irreducible fact: the loneliness of being exactly equivalent  to all others.'
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
This scene of wild partying was probably inspired by the Albert Hall Ball, held in London on 3 December 1913. Nevinson was fascinated by the idea of simultaneity. His composition here not is just depicting dancers, but conveys the experience of dancing. He was the only British artist to wholeheartedly embrace futurism, co-signing the manifesto Vital English Art which rejected the pretty-pretty, the commonplace, the soft, sweet, and mediocre in English culture, in favour of the modern and dynamic.
Bomberg was closely associated with the Vorticist  group in London. His ability to organise  forms into powerful compositions is evident in  this painting which was carefully prepared in  several preliminary drawings. The subject is taken  from the Old Testament and illustrates the  occasion when God guided the prophet to a valley  full of bones and commanded him to speak. 'There  was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones  came together.' Skeletal yet animated the figures  appear to emerge from the platform. The brilliant  colours emphasise the exultation associated with  resurrection. Bomberg may have chosen this text  after the sudden death of his mother. The pair had  been close and he may have found consolation in  this positive theme.
This painting was made after the dispersal of the CoBrA group, but it demonstrates the artist's continuing commitment to the ideals of expressive, spontaneous painting. Appel worked with the paint at high speed and with no preconceived scheme, turning the large canvas around from time to time. The figurative elements were added last. Their appearance recalls the naivety of paintings made by children, whose untrained and unadulterated approach was much admired by CoBrA artists.
'You Make Me' is an ambiguous phrase suggesting both coercion and completeness. Is it a statement about force or about making someone whole? Wool appropriates texts from sources such as films, but uses repetition or unexpected intervals between words and letters to fracture meaning. Here the words are stacked up, disrupting our ability to read them as a fluid sentence. Since the mid-1980s, Wool's paintings have generally consisted of either abstract ornamental imagery or black lettering on a white background. In both groups the images appear magnified, taken to the brink of disintegration.
Gaudier was born in France but spent most of his tragically brief adult career in London. He was an important pioneer in the revival of carving in sculpture.This sculpture is perhaps his most important work, and demonstrates his use of a more abstract style. The poet Ezra Pound described it as almost a thesis of his ideas upon the use of pure form. It also shows Gaudiers interest in primitive cultures, through artefacts he saw at the British Museum. These sources, together with the undulating movement of the dance, give the figure a sense of erotic power.
This is one of a sequence of pastels and drawings, many of which were executed on the spot, which were preparatory studies for an oil painting of the same subject now in the collection of the National Gallery, London. Miss Lala was a circus acrobat whose star turn involved being hoisted to the roof suspended by her teeth. Degas very much enjoyed popular entertainments, and executed many studies of dancers and singers. It seems that he respected, and possibly sympathised with, performers who were engaged in disciplined and strenous physical activity.
For Bernard Jacobsen
P07377
This print is dedicated to the art dealer and publisher Bernard Jacobsen. It shows the view from a balcony in India at night; the yellow forms and blue dots represent banana leaves. The idea for the print grew out of an aborted project to illustrate EM Fosters book A Passage to India.

This was one of the first prints to be on the same scale as Hodgkins paintings. It is also one of the most technically complicated prints he has ever made. Not only are layers of printing and hand colouring interleaved, but each sheet of paper was hand-dyed using vegetable dyes to achieve its rich dark colour.
The broad, gestural style of Lost Mine reflects the impact of American Abstract Expressionist painters such as Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning and Franz Kline, whose work Lanyon first encountered in the early 1950s. Typically for Lanyon, however, its seeming abstraction is combined with a precise external source: a tin mine in his native Cornwall that had been flooded by the sea and abandoned. The colours are both representational and symbolic. The black stands for the mine shaft and seems to signify death, the blues are the sea and sky, the red signals life and danger.
This is one of the largest of Moore's sculptures  of a seated female nude, and it was cast in an  edition of nine. The original plaster is in the  Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, and the curator  there, Alan Wilkinson, has described this  sculpture as 'one of the most potent images of  fertility produced in the 20th century'. He also  related it to Moore's early interest in  Palaeolithic sculpture, an influence the artist  readily acknowledged. Moore wrote of the work:  ''Woman' has that startling fullness of the  stomach and breasts. The smallness of the head is  necessary to emphasize the massiveness of the body  - if the head had been any larger it would have  ruined the whole idea of the sculpture.'
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
This painting demonstrates Turners ability to capture and define the spirit of place. Despite the baffling absence of any church named San Benedetto, the view is an authentic Venetian prospect looking from the Giudecca Canal towards Fusina on the mainland. More than that, however, it was Turners stylistic treatment of colour, light and water which constituted the very essence of how people thought about Venice. This was most clearly expressed by John Ruskin who wrote that without one single accurate detail it was the likest thing to what it is meant for ... of all that I have ever seen.
Stella used an ordinary house-painter's brush to establish the width of the stripes and worked with commercial paints taken straight from the can. He wanted to dispel any interpretive reading of his work, commenting in 1964, 'My painting is based on the fact that only what can be seen there is there. All I want anyone to get out of my paintings and all I ever get out of them is the fact that you can see the whole idea without any confusion. What you see is what you see.' The title of Six Mile Bottom refers to a village in England, where the poet Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh lived.
In this painting, Martin used the same procedure to generate the lines as in the 'Chance and Order' painting with black lines also in this room. He used green, red, mauve and blue, in that order. He commented, 'when I turn the drawing round I repeat the first drawing in the new orientation. After completing the drawing of all four directions I would have performed a symmetrical act. However, not only have the first lines of the original position qualified the lines following within itself, but this process has continued throughout the work, so that I get... an asymmetric design. Time takes a part in producing the final configuration. It is a history picture.'
The fabric of Flag I contains traces of blood, soil and other substances from the sites of murders around the northern border of Mexico, testifying to the thousands of violent deaths associated with the powerful drug cartels that control smuggling routes to the United States. Another version of this work was shown at the Venice Biennial in 2009, where Margolles represented Mexico with an exhibition titled What Else Could We Talk About? As the government failed to intervene in the drug wars, the blood-stained cloth was hung outside the Mexican pavilion as a memorial for citizens that the nation ignored.
This is one of a series of images Burney produced satirising attitudes towards music. Here his subject is the battle between traditional and modern music. Modern music is represented by Beethoven and Mozart, whose names appear in the foreground. Traditional music is represented by a bust of Handel in the upper centre. A group of musicians is playing (badly) music by Handels contemporary, Corelli. They are dressed in the traditional clothing of Handels day, including the tye-wigs mentioned in the title.
In 1950, at the age of 62, Albers began what would become his signature series, the Homage to the Square. Over the next 26 years, until his death in 1976, he produced hundreds of variations on the basic compositional scheme of three or four squares set inside each other, with the squares slightly gravitating towards the bottom edge. What may at first appear to be a very narrow conceptual framework reveals itself as one of extraordinary perceptual complexity. In 1965, he wrote of the series: They all are of different palettes, and, therefore, so to speak, of different climates. Choice of the colours used, as well as their order, is aimed at an interaction - influencing and changing each other forth and back. Thus, character and feeling alter from painting to painting without any additional hand writing or, so-called, texture. Though the underlying symmetrical and quasi-concentric order of squares remains  the same in all paintings  in proportion and placement  these same squares group or single themselves, connect  and separate in many different ways.
Taken from a photograph by Wilfred Bauer, this lithograph shows Beuys at the desk of his Information Office at documenta V, Kassel in 1972. The Information Office was run under the auspices of the Organization for Direct Democracy, a platform for the propagation of the artists radical ideas, which he had founded the previous year. For 100 days Beuys tirelessly debated his ideas with visitors to the exhibition. On the last day, he fought a Boxing Match for Direct Democracy.
Dunbar was established as a mural painter, working at Brockley School in Kent, before she was appointed an Official War Artist in 1940. She was commissioned to record the Land Army at work. This picture, she said, was painted at Strood towards the end of the war, about 1944-5. It is an imaginative painting of a Land Girls work with an outdoor dairy herd on the Hampshire Downs. The bail is the moveable shed where the milking is done. The bull is enclosed within it.
Gallery label, September 2004
This painting seems to be an abandoned companion  to 'Caernarvon Castle'. Perhaps consciously, the  two paintings perfectly illustrate the fashionable  aesthetic concepts of 'beautiful' and 'sublime'.  It is more faithful, however, to Gray's 'The  Bard', particularly where the poem describes  Edward I's army winding through Snowdonia (open  in a nearby display case). Historically, Edward's  final advance in 1283 preceded the building of  Caernarvon Castle. It is this earlier moment which  lies at the heart of Turner's landscape of  breathtaking savageness, paralleling that of the  advancing force. The archetypal image of the Bard  issuing his curse from the mountains above is  absent, although this is perhaps experimented with  on another sheet (shown adjacently).
Aitchison has been painting the subject of the  Crucifixion all his professional life. His first  one man show in 1958 contained a small painting of  the crucified Christ attended by two angels, with  a landscape background divided, as here, into  coloured bands. Aitchison takes the subject of the  Crucifixion, already loaded with associations,  ideas and meanings, and recharges it with his own  deep and intense emotions by means of shape and  colour. Sometimes the figure of Christ has arms  but usually he is armless, as in this picture.  Aitchison has said 'Everybody knows who he is. He  doesn't need arms'. The Crucifixion is set against  a hill called Goat Fell, on the Isle of Arran, a  childhood holiday place.
In classical mythology, the Cyclops was an immensely strong giant with a single eye in the centre of his forehead. The skin of this lumbering bronze figure is imprinted with broken machine-parts and other found debris. Paolozzi made it by pressing pieces of metal into a bed of moist clay, and then pouring molten wax into the clay mould. He constructed the model from these sheets of wax forms and finally cast it in bronze. Its pierced armour and dilapidated state has been seen as an ironic comment on the condition of man in the nuclear age.
The sitter was Nina Forrest, an artist's model  and the wife of the painter Henry Lamb. Lamb called her Euphemia because she looked like  the female in the Italian Renaiassance artist Andrea Mantegna's painting of St Euphemia. Epstein and Lamb were good friends and Nina  sat twice for Epstein. Epstein has kept to the format of early Renaissance portrait busts here, probably in order to suggest a link with the Mantegna painting.
Struth has photographed visitors in some of the best known museums in Europe and America. He is fascinated by the culture of museum visiting and by the ways in which visitors and the museum respond to and affect each other. Key elements in Struths Museum Pictures are light, space and architecture, both in galleries themselves and in the pictures they display. He is especially interested in how spectators movements affect these formal aspects through pose, grouping and gesture.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, February 2004
This is one of about nine paintings from the same period and is painted in a pigmented shellac laid over glass re-inforced plastic. The strips of aluminium which are part of the work act as brackets to attach it to the wall. Ryman pays great attention to the marks of the paintbrush and uses white because he regards it as less emotionally charged than other colours. His works are about surface, texture, grain and luminosity rather than spatial composition.
This is one of a group of images Cahun created in 1936 to illustrate a book of poems for children. All are compositions of miniature scenes that elevate ordinary objects into a mysterious and extra-ordinary world of the imagination. This photograph accompanied the lines: three little shoes / my shirt burns me / three little shoes / climb up the stairs.
Gallery label, September 2004
Maekawa was a prominent member of the Gutai Art Association, a group of artists working in Japan from 1954-1972 in Japan who utilised industrial and everyday materials and shared an interest in the performative nature of painting. To create Two Junctions, Maekawa placed pieces of burlap, a textile used to make jute rice bags, onto a canvas, then cut, sewed and folded the material. He then poured and dripped coloured enamel paint over the textured surface, producing an abstract image that transcends the flatness traditionally associated with painting.
Gallery label, July 2008
Hamilton has described the Large Glass as an epic poem, a technical treatise and a pictorial masterpiece. In this print, he combines a diagram of the artwork with English translations of Duchamps notes from the Green Box, bringing together the visual and literary elements of Duchamps project. The Typo/Typography underlines Duchamps desire to create a work that required an analytical response from the viewer, rather than a purely aesthetic one.
In his memoirs Rothenstein recalled how he had  gone by chance into Spitalfields Synagogue, and  was gripped by the scene of mourning Jews. He was  not allowed to paint in the Synagogue itself, so  took a room nearby and persuaded some of the men  to sit for him. Some of the models have been used  twice in the picture: the two standing men appear  to be the same person. Rothenstein was  himself Jewish, and painted several scenes of  contemporary Jewish culture in the early years of  the century. The picture was first shown at the  NEAC 1906 summer exhibition. Afterwards it went on  to the celebration of Jewish life in Britain held  at the Whitechapel Art Gallery. The picture was  presented to the Tate in 1907 by Jacob Moser to  commemorate that exhibition.
Gainsborough was one of the most celebrated 18th-century society portrait painters but he also painted landscapes. This is one of several pictures on the theme of peasants travelling to or from market. These articulate a sense of nostalgia for the old ways of country life, where independent family units were able to support themselves by working the land. Here, a family is shown in a moment of rest after the labours of the day. The paintings rich colours and swelling forms evoke the example of the 17th-century painter Rubens, giving the scene a feeling of peaceful grandeur.
This painting records the peculiar damage inflicted on a church in the village of Coggeshall in Essex, near the artists home. It recalls, however, images John Armstrong made in the 1930s in which ruined buildings served as symbols for political violence such as the Spanish Civil War. This was made as part of the artists work as an official war artist and it may be that the structure of the building that is revealed intact beneath the stonework is a symbol of resilience at a time of threat.
Executed in the south of France, this painting shows a comfortably furnished apartment with  a view over the Mediterranean. The sunlit  interior suggests relaxation and pleasure,  but the painting has a mysterious intensity that  seems strangely at odds with the domesticity  of the scene. The young girl appears stiff and immobile, like an ancient statue, her face  curiously inexpressive. The rigorous order of  the composition, with its repeated verticals, reinforces the atmosphere of stillness.
The bed is no longer somewhere for rest or privacy in this sculpture. Hatoum has precisely reproduced the form of a single bed so that the top surface swells along the edges like a soft mattress. But any suggestion of comfort is denied by the steel plate material she has chosen, more usually associated with industrial architecture or military defences. The textured metal would leave an imprint on the flesh of anyone lying on the divan. This relates to Hatoums earlier performance and video work exploring forms of physical and political oppression.
Untitled (emergency room) is one of two recent paintings by the artist acquired in 1998. Their  purchase supplements two earlier works by Rae that are also owned by the Tate Collection and give depth to her representation here. Typically, Rae combines contrasting ways of applying paint within a single canvas, leaving the viewer unable to read the painting in any one way. Vividly coloured  geometric disks play against a background of  vigorous black and white brushwork.
In this painting Watts wanted to express the spirit governing the system he called the immeasurable expanse. A heavily-draped figure, enveloped by large wings, gazes deep into a globe or crystal ball held at the centre of the composition. Despite its weighty robes the figure appears to defy gravity as it hovers mysteriously in space. Like Michelangelos sibyls on the Sistine Chapel ceiling, Wattss figure appears monumental and androgynous, qualities which suggest a higher knowledge of the universe.
Dressed in a robe inspired by Grecian dress, the sitter is shown pouring oil onto burning coals in a sacrificial tribute to the Roman goddess Minerva, associated with wisdom and the arts. The richly textured painted surface and striking colour scheme recall the work of the Venetian Renaissance painter Titian. Reynolds wanted his portraits to be esteemed as a form of painting as artistically ambitious as the work of such universally admired masters. It was exhibited at the Royal Academys annual exhibition in 1782, and engraved in mezzotint, ensuring that the image circulated far beyond aristocratic circles.
Created at the height of Thatcherism, this is a reworking of Gainsboroughs (17271788) Mr and Mrs Andrews, 1750. That portrait suggests identity and status, and can be read as a comment on property and capital. Wallingers jumbled fragmentation of the painting, the addition of a human scarecrow as the dominant image, and the word Albion spray-painted over painting and wall, together contrast images of Englishness and Heritage with the anger of a dispossessed underclass. Wallinger joins a late Victorian romanticised view of Albion  the landscape of the agricultural worker  with decay and social violence.
Turner exhibited this picture in 1832, with a passage from the Bible (Daniel iii, 26). This told how Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego emerged unharmed from the fiery furnace they had been thrown into for refusing to worship Nebuchadnezzar's idol (visible in the distance).
Mamelles is a large-scale wall relief in which a series of female breasts have been moulded within a horizontal structure reminiscent of a classical frieze. The breasts can be seen as a symbol of womans nurturing role, while also exposing the female body as a sexualised object, stripped bare and vulnerable. Bourgeois has linked this work to the mythical seducer Don Juan, and said that it portrays a man who lives off the woman he courts, making his way from one to the next. Feeding from them but returning nothing, he loves only in a consumptive and selfish manner.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
In 1926 Ambroise Vollard commissioned Chagall to  illustrate La Fontaine's 'Fables'. 'The Cat  Transformed into a Woman' illustrates the story of  a man who so adored his cat that he was able to  turn her into a woman and marry her. He thought  she would be the perfect wife. However, he soon  realised he could not change her in every respect,  as she still chased mice. This work is one of a  hundred etchings executed by Chagall for  the 'Fables'. Vollard was criticized for not  commissioning a French artist, but he believed  Chagall shared the same aesthetic sense as La  Fontaine, 'being at the same time naive and  subtle, realistic and fantastic'.
Auerbach spent many evenings with his friend and frequent model, Stella West in this sitting room. The earthy colours generate a sense of warmth and intimacy. Stella appears in profile on the left, leaning forward. Across the room, her daughter is seated in a chair beside a standard lamp. As one critic has commented, 'The forms are experienced rather than exhaustively explained. There is a depth and atmosphere. The room, as DHLawrence would say, has a soul'.
Gallery label, September 2004
The famous physicist Albert Einstein (1879-1955) fled Germany in 1933, and was staying in a refugee camp in Britain when Epstein made this portrait bust. However, Einstein left to take up a professorship at Princeton before it was completed. Epstein later described Einsteins wild hair floating in the wind and wrote that his glance contained a mixture of the humane, the humorous, and the profound. This was a combination that delighted me. He resembled the ageing Rembrandt.

Jacob Epstein was born in New York in 1880 and died in London in 1959.
Giacometti completed these paintings shortly before the 1965 exhibition of his work at the Tate Gallery, which Sylvester curated. They were completed at night and by artificial light. Sylvester wrote of the sense of space in such works. ''It was as if he was looking at the face from very near, so that all sense of the head as a sphere out there in space was lost and he was left with the prominent features ... The poetic mood of the studio''s space is replaced by a forthright confrontation with a presence that dominates the space in front of the canvas.''
Lambert was one of the pioneers of landscape painting in early eighteenth-century Britain. 

This painting presents the landscape without the sorts of buildings palaces or an aristocratic estate  which traditionally featured in such views. Is this evidence of a new appreciation of nature for its own sake? Certainly, landscape became the focus for discussions about the relationship between painting and poetry, and aesthetic ideas such as beauty and the sublime.
This work is an enlargement of a tabloid newspaper double-page spread, otherwise unchanged by Lucas. I use sexist attitudes because they are there to be used, she has said, Im dipping into the culture, pointing a finger: directing attention to whats there. Even though Lucas is somewhat resistant to her work being labelled as Feminist Art, literature on feminism and sexual politics has had a huge influence on her work. The majority of it engages with the objectification of the female body and with gender stereotypes, using the casual language of everyday sexism to confront and dissect them.
One of the most famous landmarks in Venice, the Bridge of Sighs connects the Doges Palace on the left with the prisons of the Palazzo dei Prigioni to the right. When Turner exhibited the painting in 1840, he accompanied it with lines based on Byrons poem, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage:

I stood upon a bridge, a palace and 
A prison on each hand.

Indeed it was Byron who allegedly coined the name of the bridge, deriving its title from the mournful image of convicts taking their last glimpse of the city before being led down to the darkness of the cells.
Born into a Palestinian family in Beirut, and now resident in London, Hatoum often addresses themes of identity and exile in her work. This video consists of still images of her face in close-up, with a pair of male hands covering her mouth which prevent her from speaking. 'My work is about my experience of living in the West as a person from the Third World, about being an outsider, about occupying a marginal position, being excluded, being defined as 'Other' or as one of 'Them', Hatoum has said.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
This is one of a series of paintings in which Boshier refers to toothpaste. He was fascinated by the culture of commodities and the increasingly-evident process of Americanisation. Toothpaste, which was the first product advertised on British television, was seen to epitomise both. Boshiers view was influenced by journalist Vance Packards critique of American advertising practices in his popular book, The Hidden Persuaders.
This work shows the 'perfect and upright'  God-fearing Job of the Old Testament, who  has endured the loss of his children and all his  possessions. He has also been smitten by boils.  In despair, he cries out to God 'What is Man  that thou shouldest... try him every moment?' Blake's image of the Biblical Job as one who  'holdeth fast his integrity' in the face of adversity has autobiographical echoes. Having endured  and recovered from his trials Job praises his Lord. Similarly, Blake, just before he died, 'burst out into singing of the things he saw in heaven'.
Turners first painting of Petworth, a palatial country house and estate inland from Chichester in West Sussex, was made following a visit in 1809. Its owner, the Earl of Egremont, supported contemporary artists and had already begun a major collection of Turners paintings. He stayed at Petworth again in 1827 and often until the Earls death in 1837, even being allocated a room for his studio. He began work on four paintings on a double-square format for specific positions in Petworths Carved Room, looking out towards the lake. These are three of the studies he made for the series.
In 1930 Nash travelled to the South of France, staying in a hotel by the sea. This image derives from a reflection of a ship in the large mirror which hung in front of his bed. The dream-like quality indicates Nash's interest in Surrealism, and in the unconscious. Read admired the way Nash managed to respond to the European influence of Surrealism, while maintaining the English character of his work. He wrote: 'The striking peculiarity of Paul Nash is that, alone in his generation, he has dared to transform the English tradition.'
This is one of Nashs first imaginative drawings, produced when he was twenty-three. The mood recalls the spiritual landscapes of William Blake. It has been suggested that for Nash, as for Blake, the pyramid was a symbol of the ascent from the earthbound to the spiritual realm, or from chaos to form. Nash described this work as a queer drawing and commented on its uncanny eclipsed moonlight. This strangeness may anticipate the  mood of his later Surreal works.
This composition shows Dismorrs exploration of the new abstract language of art. The dark background and apparent use of shaded sides implies the presence of invented three-dimensional forms in space. Their straight lines and arches evoke architectural forms, but with no visible foundation, the shapes appear to be floating or in movement.
Gallery label, September 2004
In this painting Hitchens used a palette knife, rags to wipe away paint and vigorous brush strokes to create an active surface. Painted in his Hampstead studio this work dates from the kind of surroundings and the period of [Hitchenss] urban life - from about 1920-40 before the full impact of nature and country living. The shallow space and overlapping forms suggest the influence of the post-cubist still lifes of Braque. So does the use of accents of colour that punctuate an otherwise sombre painting. The strength of the colour, however, is more suggestive of Matisse.
At the centre of this work is a shape reminiscent of the sun, but its surface is filled with charred cracks that the artist made by burning the plastic. It was created in 1964, immediately after Kim completed his military service in Korea: The work is based on my experience of death. I spent some time in the military hospitalwhere I saw many young men losing their lives. With the lack of medicine and proper medical care, so many lives were being lost, and I felt that human existence was extremely insignificant.
On 21 January 1830 Turner attended the funeral at St Paul's Cathedral of the portrait painter and President of the Royal Academy, Sir Thomas Lawrence. The next day he wrote to a friend: 'It is something to feel that gifted talent can be acknowledged by the many who yesterday waded up to their knees in snow and muck to see the funeral pomp swelled up by carriages of the great'. This watercolour was exhibited by Turner at the Royal Academy in 1830. It well evokes the crisp, chill air of a cold January day. A group of women to the right have their hands tucked inside their muffs, their shoulders huddled forward with the cold.
Lowry was fascinated by buildings. For him they evoked the lives of their occupants. He felt that 'A country landscape is fine without people, but an industrial set without people is an empty shell. A street is not a street without people... it is as dead as mutton'. In the 1920s he frequently drew in Salford: 'There were special parts I liked, a bit Georgian, older than the rest. My favourite places were the houses built around factories. They just attracted me more than the others.' Revisiting Orsdall Lane in the 1960s Lowry remembered that as he had drawn in front of the dwelling, 'scores of little kids who hadn't had a wash for weeks would come and stand around me. And there was a niff, too.'
During the late spring of 1972 David Tremlett travelled through all 81 counties of England, Scotland and Wales. In each county he made a recording lasting approximately fifteen minutes. With the exception of Greater London, each recording was made in quiet rural locations and is of whatever could be heard at that time (principally wind and bird song). Tremlett observed that your field, or your hill, or your landscape is your studio.
In the late 1960s artists began to 

use their own bodies as a medium of expression in Performance art. These were events which were meant to be experienced live, although they were often recorded in photographs.
This study and its related painting demonstrate Bomberg's search for a purely visual language with which to express his perceptions of the urban environment. They show his precocious understanding of Cubism and Futurism, and of the artists who later became known as Vorticists. The subject was based on a scene of dockers working in the hold of a steel ship. A ladder, seen in the lower right of the picture, connects the hold with the deck above. The drawing is divided into sixty-four squares and a diagonal grid which produces a cross in each square. This geometrical framework, repeated in the final painting, dissolves the subject of the picture into dynamic angular facets.
In 1932, the year he carved this, Moore was appointed Head of Sculpture at Chelsea School of Art. The pose of this figure is reminiscent of earlier carved portrait busts, but the abstracted treatment of the forms indicate Moore's interest in non-western art. In later life Moore wrote of his admiration for an Egyptian sculpture of a seated woman in the British Museum collections. He particularly enjoyed the way her head-dress was 'freed from the body so that you can look through its arches to the delicate neck inside'. In this sculpture Moore has created a similar effect by making a space between the figure's hair and her neck.
Degas did not give this work its title, and it  seems likely that this figure is not even a  dancer. The idea for the sculpture may have  originated in a series of studies of bathers  climbing out of a bath and drying their feet. As  in all his sculptures, Degas has focused not on  the figure's sexual identity but on her physical  action. 'These women of mine', he once said, 'are  honest, simple folk, unconcerned by any other  interests than those involved in their physical  condition'. While such comments are, to some  extent, typical of nineteenth-century attitudes,  recent scholars have debated the assumptions about  class and gender that Degas' works reveal.
This drawing by Moore can be closely associated  with his sculptures of the period. Typically, the  forms suggest at once human bodies, shells and  bones, and interior bodily shapes. For Moore,  drawing was a kind of investigative process, which  would throw up new ideas for sculpture. Instead of  producing a single, resolved image, the sculptor  would generally cover the paper with different,  half-finished sketches.
This 'conversation piece' exemplifies Zoffany's abilities to create images of family life at once painstakingly naturalistic and minutely attentive  to the appropriate social roles of his sitters. The sitters are Richard Dalton, antiquarian and graphic artist and librarian to George III; his wife Esther  and their orphaned niece Mary de Heulle, whom the Daltons (who were childless) adopted. Zoffany depicts them as exemplary parents, Richard taking care of the girl's aesthetic and intellectual education, while Elizabeth is engaged in a suitably genteel practical 'accomplishment'.
Mir believed that ambiguity was essential to the poetic effect of his work. Accordingly, he deliberately left the identity of the shapes in this painting unclear. Soon after its completion he compared the central black shape to both a cloud and a whale. However, preliminary sketches show that the composition was derived from an arrow drawn on an envelope by Alexander Calder, the friend of the title. As one commentator has remarked, the work as a whole became a meditation on communication.
This large painting was first exhibited at the Royal Academy in London in 1820. It shows a scene from the life of Christ. Jairus was a leader of the synagogue whose daughter lay dying. Jairus appealed to Jesus for help, and despite the scepticism of the mourners in attendance the child was returned to life. Jairuss daughter is placed at the centre of the canvas, prepared for burial. The painting is a rare example of large-scale religious art by a British artist. It was created in an academic style indebted to the examples of 16th and 17th-century Italian and French art.
Gallery label, September 2004
'Figure in a Landscape' is the earliest of the  drawings by Bacon now in the Tate Collection.  Both carefully conceived and spontaneously  painted, it demonstrates how such sketches allowed  him to practice with both image and handling. The  nude man crouching in long grass is seen rather  more clearly in the related oil painting 'Study of  Figure in a Landscape' 1952 (Phillips Collection,  Washington). The slashing brushstrokes suggest  that this immersion in nature is not without its  perils. These works followed Bacon's trips through  southern Africa in 1951 and 1952, but also drew  upon his enthusiasm for the photographs in  'Stalking Big Game with a Camera in Equatorial  Africa' by Marius Maxwell.
According to Arman, this work expresses 'a form of contradiction', since the shaving brushes that seem to float within the polyester female torso 'are usually used by men'. The title refers to the folk-tale of Bluebeard, who married and then murdered several women. It is also a pun on the shaving motif. The female figure is reminiscent of both classical sculpture and fashion mannequins, suggesting another contradiction within the work between high art and mass-produced everyday materials. Arman described sculptures like this, incorporating manufactured objects, as 'accumulations'.
In 1937 Cedric Morris and his partner Arthur Lett-Haines opened their own private art school at Dedham in Essex, which they called The East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing. The school provided its students with an atmosphere of freedom, dedication and enthusiasm. David Carr and Barbara Gilligan were both students at this art school when they sat for this joint portrait. They married later. David Carr was a painter and sculptor and Barbara was a painter. Morris has presented these two friends in an unusual composition and has enjoyed painting the textures of their woollen jumpers.
This is the earliest picture in the Tate collection. The artists name is inscribed on the back, and the inscriptions on the front indicate that the work was painted in the year of our Lord 1545, and that the sitter was aged 26. Bettes is first recorded carrying out decorative work for Henry VIIIs court in 15313, and he may have worked with Hans Holbein the Younger, the most famous Tudor painter. Originally this portrait was larger, and would have had a blue background similar to the colour often used by Holbein. Due to long exposure to light, the pigment (smalt) has changed to brown.
In this series Sherman radically alters her appearance using make-up, hairstyles, hats and different facial expressions. She has explained, I made [them] to show the process of turning one character into another. At that time I was merely interested in the use of make-up on a face as paint used on a blank canvas. Shermans self-transformation, combining evident staging with the successful portrayal of a character type, continues to be central to her work today.
Gallery label, September 2004
Although born in London, Turner made few finished watercolours of the city or its buildings. However, Old London Bridge particularly engaged his attention, and he drew it a number of times.
Kohs sculpture incorporates a series of glass structures that resemble museum display cases while also recalling the spare, geometric forms of minimalist art. However, the cubes and the objects they contain are gilded  a technique associated with luxury commodities  and this surface layer transforms their appearance and meaning.
Gallery label, July 2008
Spencer liked the story in St Luke Chapter 7, in  which after marvelling at the centurion's faith,  Jesus heals his sick servant without entering the  house. Bringing this into his own time and place,  Spencer set the scene in the maid's bedroom in the  attic of his home, a room which he too never  entered. Sometimes he heard strange voices coming  from the room which he later discovered was simply  the maid talking through the wall to another  servant. Thus, the biblical narrative reminded him  of experiences in his own life. These also  included kneeling in prayer at church, and Cookham  villagers praying around the bed of a dying man, a  custom his mother had told him about. The youth on  the bed has Spencer's own features.
In his work of this period Derain explored the traditions of past art. The unusual size and monumental quality of this painting can be seen as reflecting his interest in seventeenth-century Baroque still lifes. Especially notable, however, are the stark contrasts of black and white and the inclusion of drawing instruments, symbols of the artist's craft. These speak of Derain's belief that the definition of lit surfaces was central to drawing, and that light was a physical manifestation of the spirit. He once wrote, 'One constructs a painting with light ... light defines the dimensions of adjacent surfaces and directs the rhythm of their relationship.'
Hardaker studied at Birmingham College of Arts and Crafts, and after completing National Service in 1955 spent three years at the Royal College of Art, London. In 1967 he wrote of this picture: '...it forms part of a series on a theme (or rather multiple themes) which is still developing... Motives for the paintings in general (as much as one dare to define them!) are architectural and philosophical in that the basically cubic container form has been connected with the cube/earth symbol in Plato's Timaeus. But also things as they are is important as any intellectual idea so that the paintings retain strong roots in things seen.'
In this emblematic marriage portrait, the groom in the centre, probably Augustus Schutz, leads his bride towards his family as she takes a backward glance at her own. Several members of the Schutz family held positions at the court of Hanover and it may be that this portrait also acts as an endorsement of the Hanoverian succession. Thus, the orange tree in the garden urn may symbolise William III and the House of Orange, while the white horse could represent the House of Hanover, whose heraldic device was a horse courant argent (a silver or white running horse).
This painting was inspired by a reproduction of an early nineteenth-century engraving of the same title. The engraving was a political satire, though its subject was unknown to Kitaj, and his painting is more concerned with the notion of the idyll and the relationship between two people as characters in a novel. Kitaj stated while I was painting the picture (first six months of 1973) I was deeply reading  Humboldts travel in the Orinoco ... I must have been touched some by those wonderful plates you find in those books.
Sliding Doors was originally commissioned for the Tate Modern exhibition Common Wealth in 2003. It was made with the spaces of Tate Modern in mind and consists of a series of five equidistant electronic sliding doors with a mirrored surface. The installation can be entered from two directions, creating the possibility of alternately confronting ones own endless reflection or the unexpected presence of another visitor. Like Hllers slides in the Turbine Hall, this work encourages interaction and provides an unexpected transition from one gallery space to another..
This is one of Trockels many works made of machine-knitted wool, which are produced following her pattern designs. Trockel first exhibited geometric knitted works in 1985, and later started using her mass-produced fabrics to make balaclavas and other items of clothing. Her early geometric patterns were followed by well-known images and logos, from the Playboy Bunny to hammers and sickles and swastikas. In such works, the differences between decorative motif, logo and ideological symbols are disturbingly blurred.
This unfinished study shows a group of figures  playing or languidly listening to music in an  unidentified setting. It was for many years  associated with the interiors of Petworth, but has  more recently been linked with the Octagon Room at  East Cowes Castle; Turner's hostess at Cowes  was Mrs John Nash, who was an accomplished  pianist. There is, however, a third possibility  based on the fact that the central figure is  based on a pencil sketch recorded during Turner's  stay in Paris in 1832. That pencil sketch may be  a hasty portrait of his acquaintance the famous  scientist Mary Somerville, who was also a talented  musician. If the setting is indeed French, the  sparkle and light of the fabrics may perhaps be  another attempt to evoke the shimmer of Watteau.
This unfinished study shows a group of figures  playing or languidly listening to music in an  unidentified setting. It was for many years  associated with the interiors of Petworth, but has  more recently been linked with the Octagon Room at  East Cowes Castle; Turner's hostess at Cowes  was Mrs John Nash, who was an accomplished  pianist. There is, however, a third possibility  based on the fact that the central figure is  based on a pencil sketch recorded during Turner's  stay in Paris in 1832. That pencil sketch may be  a hasty portrait of his acquaintance the famous  scientist Mary Somerville, who was also a talented  musician. If the setting is indeed French, the  sparkle and light of the fabrics may perhaps be  another attempt to evoke the shimmer of Watteau.
The private worlds of day-time reverie and sleep had been the preferred themes of Balthus's work since the mid-1930s. The young woman here, whose identity is unknown, appears to be in deep slumber. However, the awkward position of her arm suggests that her sleep might be feigned, and reminds us that the scene as a whole has been contrived by the artist. The woman's dress front appears casually undone, but its erotic appeal seems, again, quite calculated. The woman's face and hairstyle are modern, but her clothes have a timeless air, and her pose, as well as the dark tonality of the painting, have precedents in the art of the Old Masters.
Gallery label, September 2004
This view of York was commissioned by Charles I as part of a group of ten paintings of towns and castles in the north of England and Scotland. It is dominated by the west front of York Minster. As the political situation deteriorated in the run-up to the Civil War, Charles I travelled north to confront hostile Scottish rebels at Berwick in May 1639. The artist may have accompanied him on this expedition. Keirincx was born and trained in Antwerp, later moving to Utrecht. He worked in Britain from 1638 to 1641, living in Orchard Street in Westminster.
This work shows how Blake responded visually to textual sources. It is an illustration to Psalm 18, in which David (at the bottom of the image with his arms stretched wide) calls out to God for salvation from his enemies. Christ appears above, riding upon seven cherubim (angels), not one as in the text. Blakes gentle, linear style, formal composition and free interpretation of a written source made him attractive 

to many modern artists. Paul Nash saw Blake as representing a British imaginative tradition.
The view is from the artist's house in Polperro, Cornwall, where he lived between 1939 and 1940. Two related oils depict a similar view of the harbour, but the addition here of a crab lends a particular air of menace. Kokoschka said that the swimmer (a self-portrait) represented Czechoslovakia, and the crab Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister of the day, who 'would only have to put out one claw to save him from drowning, but remains aloof.' Kokoschka remarked that paintings had the habit of turning into political allegories if brought back to London unfinished, as in this case. This work with its transition from landscape to allegory proclaims Kokoschka's committed style of the early 1940s.
Gallery label, August 2004
Philip Sutton paints figures and landscapes. He  studied at the Slade School of Art, London, from  1949 to 1953 and was awarded a French State  scholarship in 1952. He had his first solo show in  London in 1956 and won prizes at the John Moores  Liverpool Exhibition in 1957 and 1963. In that  year he went to live in the Fiji Islands for  eleven months with his wife and four small  children and since then he has been known for his  bright colour harmonies. In the 1950s and 1960s he  lived in Snape, near Aldeburgh in Suffolk, and  this is where 'The Tree' was painted. 'The Tree'  depicts a fruit tree with its spring blossom in  the artist's garden, and it was first exhibited in  1958 under the title of 'Spring'.
Julian Trevelyan worked with Mass Observation, which applied anthropological survey methods to British society. It was founded in 1937, the year after the Jarrow March, a mass protest against unemployment. While the primary tool in gathering information was hundreds of amateur diarists, photography and painting were also used. After a visit to Bolton, Trevelyan returned home via Stoke on-Trent, describing its industrial area as a landscape full of drama and pathos, explaining how human beings seemed to creep about almost apologetically among the manmade disasters.
This work resulted from a day-long fifty-mile circular walk via Dover. Hamish Fulton took this photograph, which shows a view over the English Channel, from a position above the Dover cliffs. The photograph records the early morning light; the coast of France resembles a dark island on the horizon.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, May 2003
Rego stated that to do a picture I always need a story to start with, although as I go along the story may change or the picture may change. The story referred to here was told to Rego by a friend and is based on Elias Canettis autobiography in which his nannys boyfriend threatens to cut out his tongue. Rego explained: the one who is most wicked is not the bogeyman but the nanny who has strapped him [the bear] up. She is so possessive and horribly evil that while I was painting the front bear another little bear appeared behind it.
Around fifteen years ago Scully began to simplify the often complex patterns in his work up to then. Where lines of different direction were included they did not cross but simply abutted. In the early 1980s he began to make paintings with relief elements. He said, 'I liked the idea of looking at a painting that you could not look at just from the front but had to move around.' The triptych form of this work was deliberately chosen. Scully was very aware of the religious associations of this format. It also presented him with the possibility of 'putting something in the middle.' 'Paul' was painted about a year after the artist's son died, and was dedicated to his memory.
This work is part of a series in which Brontstein took the development of Paternoster Square in the City of London as a starting point to explore the politics and effects of reconstruction. The drawing, housed in an original 1650s frame, alludes to a grandiose historic event when actually it is a reference to a project that was completed in 2003.
Bratby attended the Royal College of Art from 1951-4 and was given a London exhibition while still a student. The art critic David Sylvester wrote an article in December 1954 about recent painting, including that of Bratby, and he titled his article 'The Kitchen Sink'. Sylvester identified a shared interest among younger painters in commonplace domestic subjects. Bratby not only chose the kitchen as a subject, but also the bathroom. He made three paintings of lavatories and at least three of bathrooms. Bratby's three paintings of lavatories focus exclusively on the toilet and are very direct in both subject and colour.
Stoke-by-Nayland lies on the north side of the Stour Valley, a few miles inland from East Bergholt and Dedham. Its church, with an imposing 15th-century tower, appears frequently in Constables drawings around 181014. This vigorous outdoor sketch belongs to the period between about 1810 and 1811, when Constable first came to maturity. The bold, agitated handling, with its unusual brushstrokes from left to right in downward sweeps, shows his new confidence with the medium to powerful effect.
This painting was originally exhibited with a quotation from Alfred Tennysons poem Come not when I am dead. The woman on the left is dying of consumption and a broken heart. The man is her errant lover. He has returned to her side but too late for them to enjoy any time together. He hides his face in shame at his deceit. She shrinks from him, clearly disturbed by his return.Windus emphasises her illness by contrasting her pale clothes, lank hair and pinched features with those of the rosy-cheeked woman in a rich purple dress.
Nicholson spent June 1954 in Venice. Here he had  a much-admired display of his work in that year's  Biennale. This picture is apparently a memory of  Torcello, the small island across the Lagoon from  Venice famous for its Byzantine mosaics in the  Cathedral. However, it is also well known for its  fine restaurants, and Nicholson's picture  appears to show some goblets and a caraffe on a  table top. Still life occupied him throughout his  career, just as it had his father. 'Torcello' was  painted in St Ives after Nicholson's return from  Italy.
The prodigious Frink began to show her work in public in 1951 and among her first sculptures was this strong and alert bird, rather like a crow or a raven. The bird theme was to occupy Frink over the next two decades. Of these early sculptures she said that they were really expressionist in feeling - in their emphasis on beak, claws and wings - and they were really vehicles for strong feelings of panic, tension, aggression and predatoriness. They were not, however, symbolic of anything else; they certainly were not surrogates for human beings or states of being.
Many of the works owned by Wilkie held a particular, often personal, significance for him. He was interested in philosophy and he saw the art he admired as expressing certain philosophical or fundamental truths. This painting by Michael Andrews demonstrates this principle. It portrays a tramp whom the artist sometimes saw when he occupied a communal studio in Digswell, Hertfordshire, in the late 1950s. Wilkie's attitude to such social outcasts - outsiders looking in on society - was compassionate and respectful. He observed that characters like Digswell Man, as Andrews called him, 'possess a true knowledge of human life... through their fundamental life'.
Gallery label, March 2004
Agar was born in Buenos Aires and came to England aged six. She studied art at the Slade School in London against her parent's wishes. She then went to Paris for two years where she befriended Picasso, Henry Moore, Man Ray, Evelyn Waugh and Ezra Pound. On her return to London she was claimed by the new Surrealist movement as an important figure. Her work at that time included collage and found objects. Paintings since the 1960s have tended to be more traditional in material, but still full of her love of playing with illusion. This painting was originally titled 'The Dark Wood' and it shows two non-corporeal figures among dark leaves, surrounded by geometrical panels.
Gallery label, September 2004
Knight started painting in her teens in her home town of Nottingham to help support her family. Influenced by Impressionism and the Newlyn School in Cornwall, Knight's subject-matter is contemporary without being avant-garde.  Dismissed by Modernists for her lack of interest in formal experiment, Knights insistent realism made her one of the most popular artists of the time.
In the 1920s, Winifred and Ben Nicholson lived  a simple, rural life at Bankshead in Cumberland. This work shows pots of flowers wrapped in  white tissue paper and arranged on a white  table, or butcher's block, in that house. The  sunlit table and domestic plant pots take on  the appearance of mystical objects on an altar  and reflect the craving for a new spirituality and peace that followed the First World War. The  sense of a higher reality beyond the mundane  is further suggested by the dots of silver paint across the surface of the image.
This print depicts Picassos companion Franoise Gilot wearing a coat he brought back for her from the World Peace Congress in Poland in 1948. Picasso made six different versions of the lithograph. This artists proof, taken from the second version, was given to Gustav and Elly for their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler and is inscribed on the back To Elly and Gustav for their silver wedding anniversary with my affection, Heini, March 1950.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
Martin adopted abstraction in the late 1940s, constructing his first mobiles in 1951. In 1953, he established his most characteristic form, the Screw Mobiles. The geometry resulting in spiral structures occurs naturally in shells. It was discussed in DArcy Wentworth Thompsons influential book On Growth and Form, which Martin is known to have consulted. The group of British artists known as the Constructionists rejected mimetic art in favour of new (predominantly geometrical) forms, materials and techniques. Yet, naturally occurring sequences could still be the sources for such works.
This is the first in a series of 12 paintings by Joseph Highmore illustrating scenes from Samuel Richardsons best-selling sentimental novel Pamela: or, Virtue rewarded. The story, first published in 17401, centres on the virtuous ladys maid Pamela Andrews. She repeatedly rebuffs, then reforms and finally marries her aristocratic would be seducer, Mr B. Scene I is set in a comfortable, panelled study of a well-to-do house. Its solid, old-fashioned furniture and a picture of The Good Samaritan over the fireplace underline the traditional values of the heroine.
During the later part of his career Hornel made a speciality of pictures of young girls in a landscape, or beside a pool of water or the sea. This was a subject he had invented and he painted it repeatedly. As with 'Autumn', the oddity of all these pictures is that the children seem embedded in leaves or undergrowth. The colours and shapes overwhelm the subject. The lack of reality implies that everything, the children and the swans, is a symbol of some general idea, perhaps about innocence, although this is not specified. The paintings were popular, probably on account of their sentimentality. Hornel made a great deal of money and eventually bequeathed his large house in Kirkcudbright as a Library and Art Gallery for the town.
Scott was one of the most successful painters in 1950s Britain. He painted figures, landscapes and especially still lifes, and was interested in the ambiguities between them. Around 1953, he also became concerned with the expressive power of the paint itself. That year he visited America, where he met many of the leading artists and recognised that his was an essentially European art.
This work is crammed with the everyday objects to be found in an artists studio, including bottles, paintbrushes, cans, books, pliers, crumpled paper and cups. The overwhelming density of objects may reflect Guttusos concern with the mass consumerism of post-war society. The multiple viewpoints and tilted planes show how Guttuso had assimilated the innovations of Cubism and reworked them into his own brand of realism. Guttuso gave this work as a gift to the Kahnweilers in 1962, after they visited him at his summer retreat near Lake Maggiore.
Klein produces photographic images on a large scale to make what she refers to as photoworks, distinguishing them from straightforward photographs. She starts with small newspaper and magazine images, enlarging them and subjecting them to a variety of processing and printing techniques which transform the visual information they contain. The results are deliberately difficult to interpret, contradicting common assumptions about photography as a documentary medium that accurately and clearly records physical phenomena.
Sickert loved the theatre. He had admired  the actress Peggy Ashcroft from one of her  earliest stage appearances, as Desdemona  in Shakespeare's tragedy Othello in 1930. This portrait was painted when Sickert was in his seventies; at this stage he often chose his  subjects from newspaper images, in this case  a photograph from the Radio Times of the actress on holiday in Venice. The painting's dry, grainy texture, and non-naturalistic, shadowless  colouring puts a distance between background, figure and viewer. This painting combines two  of Sickert's favourite themes: Venice and theatre.
Gallery label, September 2004
Many of Gabo's sculptures first appeared as tiny models. They were often projects for monumental public schemes, rarely achieved, in which sculpture and architecture came together. His proposal  that Monument for an Airport could be used  to advertise Imperial Airways, as either a desk display or an outdoor sculpture, was never realised. Model for 'Torsion', however, was eventually translated into a large fountain outside St Thomas' Hospital in London. Gabo's increasing concern, from the late 1930s, with the aesthetic aspect of his work at the expense of the industrial can be seen in Model for 'Construction in Space "Crystal"'.
This is the first in a series of ten paintings on the biblical story of Adam and Eve. They were commissioned by the brewer Laurence Hodson as a frieze for his library at Compton Hall, near Wolverhampton. The strong contours and pale colours give the scene a modern and a dream-like quality. The Eve cycle was admired by the artist Walter Sickert and by the younger generation of London art students.
This was drawn during the final months of the artist's life, after he moved to Auvers-sur-Oise in May 1890. It represents a view looking across the river Oise towards Mry and the Paris road. The view is taken from the top of a high and very steep embankment above a railway line. The old bridge of Auvers (since replaced by a modern structure) is on the right. The plumy forms in the bottom right-hand corner suggest the smoke of a passing train. It would appear that the trees along the riverbank are purely an imaginative addition by the artist. The work has been affected by fading and the colours are no longer as strong as they once were.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
This canvas was originally an exploration of industrial machinery, but it was reworked to show the moment when a bronze statue of the Duke of Wellington was removed from its mould. Using the intense light of the foundry to obscure the figure, Turner transforms Wellington into an ethereal presence. The image is in stark contrast to Turners carefully researched battle scenes. Here, tone and colour are employed to endow a national hero with elemental force.
The Jas de Bouffan was an estate on the outskirts of Aix-en-Provence with a fine house dating from the seventeenth century. It belonged to Czanne's family. Its avenue of chestnut trees provided the motif for a series of pictures by Czanne, of which this is the earliest. Although difficult to date, it seems likely that it was painted after Czanne's Impressionist phase. The construction of the picture, with its compressed space, heavy forms and slab-like diagonal foliage (made using a palette knife) is complex. It marks the first appearance of various elements that were to characterise many of his later, classically designed landscapes.
George Lambert never visited Italy, although his paintings were inspired by the tradition of classical landscape painting.
This painting illustrates the poem Aurora Leigh by Elizabeth Barret Browning. Aurora is an aspiring poet. Her cousin Romney has proposed marriage but she rejects him in order to follow her vocation as a writer. She holds a book of her poems that Romney has derided in the past. This underlines her rejection of his offer to be his companion and helper.The poem describes Aurora dressed in white but here Arthur Hughes uses an unusual green to complement the garden setting. The white lilies symbolise Auroras purity and the single life she may lead dedicated to her art.
Gallery label, September 2004
Little death is a literal translation of the French term for orgasm, la petite mort. This work connects the sexual act not only with death, but also with the rhythms of a machine. The reference to castration in the title emphasises the impotence of this inert, broken-down mechanism. The work of the Chapman brothers recalls the disturbing sexual fetishism and fascination with dismemberment of the Surrealists.
The sculptures, wall paintings and other works created by Opie in the 1990s look like simplified illustrations from instruction manuals or children?s picture books. Each work starts from a mundane reality: a particular car seen parked on a road, an actual office block standing in a town centre. While recognisable, this life-size model of a Volvo is no longer specific. It has become a diagram or sign that stands for a type of car.
My paintings have no titles because I do not wish them to be considered illustrations or pictorial puzzles, Still wrote. If properly made visible they speak for themselves. In a letter discussing this work, he explained that the red at the lower edge was intended to contrast with and therefore emphasise the depths of the blue. He saw the yellow wedge at the top as a reassertion of the human context - a gesture of rejection of any authoritarian rationale or system of politico-dialectical dogma.
This stylised, two-dimensional print is based on promotional material produced by the domestic appliance company, Braun. The text was compiled by Hamilton from Braun advertisements. Toaster reflects Hamilton's interest in consumer culture and modern design. He wrote of Braun's chief designer: 'My admiration for the work of Dieter Rams is intense and I have for years been uniquely attracted towards his design sensibility; so much so that his consumer products have come to occupy a place in my heart and consciousness that the Mont Sainte-Victoire did in Czanne's.'
This painting commemorates a dinner party  given in March 1964 by the painter Bernard Cohen and his wife Jeanie. Hodgkin later recalled, 'I had to contend with a nervous and glittering evening  in a green and white room full of small B. Cohens on the wall'. Some of the marks in this picture derive from the forms in Cohen's paintings. The white line both represents the edge of the table and reiterates the flatness of the picture plane.
Henderson's images of the human head have been seen as the culmination of what he referred to as his 'stressed' photographs. These are full of destruction, atrophy 

and decay. They have been related to his traumatic experiences during the Second World War (1939-45) and have been seen to be suited to an age of nuclear anxiety.
'Nulli Secundus', Latin for second to none, is a painting of Hofmann's late period. Hofmann emigrated to the U.S.A from Germany in 1930 and in 1934 set up an art school in New York. He was a widely influential teacher. However, it was only after he closed his school in 1958 that his painting blossomed. Hofmann tended to work out the compositions of his paintings by pinning coloured paper shapes to his canvas. His work is a synthesis of Cubism, Fauvism and geometric abstraction. He regularly evoked nature but was keen to respect the inherent differences between pictorial experiences and those of the natural world. He wrote: 'In nature, light creates color: in the picture, color creates light.'
Lipchitz received a thoroughly traditional training in sculpture. This involved copying plaster casts of classical sculpture, and learning how to develop an idea from small clay sketches to full-scale plaster models, which could then be copied in bronze or stone by craftsmen. The inspiration for this work lies less with traditional classical models, however, than with archaic sculptures of an earlier period, and, perhaps, medieval statuary. The woman's flattened features, the way in which her arms are pulled into the body, and the theme of pregnancy were all anti-classical, and reflected Lipchitz's awareness of the new interest amongst avant-garde artists in previously disregarded types of past sculpture.
Gallery label, September 2004
The first, wooden, version of this sculpture was lost during the Second World War. Moore made a modified version in plaster in 1960 and cast it in bronze. In his use of strings in this and other sculptures of 1937-9 Moore was influenced by Naum Gabo's interest in articulating space. However, this practice is also an extension of Moore's interest in the intersection of space and solid as exemplified by pierced forms. Writing in 'Circle' the scientist J. D. Bernal stated that 'Negative curvature ... is characteristic of much modern work, as are subtle inflections and the use of nodal points.' This sculpture suggests, in an abstract way, a reclining female figure.
Judd wanted to remove all physical traces 

of the artist's hand from the making of a work, believing that they would distract viewers. From 

the mid-1960s, all his works were fabricated industrially according to his specifications. The seductively uniform surface of this work, enhanced by the reflective finish of the copper, calls attention to its industrial origins. The four projecting sections follow a simple arithmetical progression, their widths increasing by 1.5 inches from left to right. The spaces in between are determined by the same progression, but in reverse order.
Samuel Palmer, inspired by Blake's Virgil wood engravings, described them as 'like the drawing aside of the fleshly curtain, and the glimpse which all the most holy, studious saints and sages have enjoyed of the rest which remaineth to the people of God.' Sutherland's few etchings inspired by Palmer present landscape with the same sense of religious ecstasy. In this work the conjunction of the star and a dazzling sun show Sutherland enlarging the idea of simple vision into  a visionary act by inviting the viewer to contemplate these heavenly bodies, just as Palmer had done.
<i>Maternity</i> is one of Gonzlez's most striking sculptures from the mid-1930s. The use of welded steel rods lends an unprecedented openness to the structure and epitomises his idea of 'drawing in space'. Like much of Gonzlez's work, <i>Maternity</i> appears to be abstract while retaining figurative references. The structure builds from the horizontal circle, through the stepped form, to the upper loop projected into space. This loop suggests a head with sprouts of hair, and a ring and plate indicate breasts.
Gallery label, August 2004
This is a small version of a relief in the Museum  of Modern Art, New York, which is over a metre wide. During the war, Nicholson produced multiple versions of his abstract paintings and reliefs in different sizes. Though this was probably prompted by economic necessity, Nicholson  had identified himself with the Constructivists  who applied principles of mass production  to art practice. The Russian sculptor Naum Gabo, Nicholson's neighbour in Cornwall, made numerous versions of a single idea as a matter of course.
During the late 1950s Giacometti made a number of fragmentary figures, their arms partly or entirely missing. Their slender, emaciated forms convey a vivid but fragile human presence. The writer Jean Genet commented: The resemblance of his figures to each other seems to me to represent that precious point at which human beings are confronted with the most irreducible fact: the loneliness of being exactly equivalent to all others.
During the 1990s Bourgeois made a number of spider sculptures. She associated the spider with her mother who spent her days weaving and stitching as she repaired antique tapestries for the family business. Bourgeois explained, I came from a family of repairers. The spider is a repairer. If you bash into the web of a spider, she doesnt get mad. She weaves and she repairs it.
As a woman in a career still largely dominated by men - including her successful brother Augustus  Gwen John had to struggle for recognition. Her contemplative studies of lone women in the calm surroundings of their home suggest intimacy and peace but also a simultaneous sadness. There is no narrative content, although this pictures title, The Convalescent, suggests a way in which we might read the painting. Like much of Gwen Johns work, it relies rather on mood, atmosphere and closely toned harmonies of colour for emotional impact. Nothing is known about the model, although she appears in about fifty of Gwen Johns later paintings.
Hiorns uses chemical or mineral processes to explore ideas of growth and change and the tensions between the industrial and the organic, the functional and the functionless. Untitled 2006 is one of his distinctive engine pieces. Standing on top of a steel structure, based on a chair designed by the sculptor Donald Judd, an engine is covered in blue crystals, which grew on the surface from copper sulphate powder. Hidden below the engine, and connected by a pipe, is a small model of a gothic cathedral, also coated with crystals.
Borland creates sculptural installations that use  the language of medical and forensic science to  examine the human condition. 'Phantom Twins'  consists of two dolls that replicate those used in  the eighteenth century to demonstrate childbirth  to medical students. Beneath the stretched leather  the skulls are visible. The original dolls would  have contained real foetal skeletons, while  Borland used plastic replica skulls obtained from  an osteological supplier. Borland is working with  ideas about the creation of life and the frailty  of human existence. Borland is interested in Mary Shelley's creation,  the doctor-scientist called Frankenstein. The  story of Frankenstein contains many intimations of  Mary Shelley's grief at the young deaths of her  own children.
For many years Richter used photographs as a source for his figurative works. In the mid-1970s he began to incorporate photography into the process of making abstract paintings. This work was made by photographing one of his smaller compositions (Oil Sketch No. 432/11), which he then projected onto a large canvas, and then traced in charcoal. He completed the larger painting with conventional brushes and oil paint, working the surface into a smooth state of finish which suggests the glossy surface of a photograph.
These photos were taken by the artist John Coplans of his own gnarled and wrinkled body.
Gallery label, September 2004
Choucairs painting and sculpture combines European abstraction with Arab and Islamic traditions. Many of her sculptures are composed of interlocking pieces, which build to create a larger structure resembling a column or a wall. Infinite Structure, a tower of multiple rectangular stone blocks, reflects her affinity with architectural structures. Choucair once said that given another life to live she would choose to be an architect.
This is probably Turners first attempt  at an oil painting of a mythological subject in a classical landscape.  The story comes from the Aeneid, by the Roman poet Virgil. Aeneas  wants to visit the Underworld in order to consult the ghost of his father. The Cumaean Sibyl agrees to guide  him through the kingdom of the dead.
This painting cleverly combines representations of the twelve animal and human symbols of the Zodiac into a dynamic composition. The twelve symbols, beginning at the top left are: Aquarius the water-carrier: Pisces the fish: Aries the ram; Taurus the bull, Gemini the twins; Cancer the crab; Leo the lion; Virgo the virgin holding the balancing scales of Libra; Scorpio the scorpion; Sagittarius the archer; and Capricorn the goat. These symbols were conceived by ancient civilizations and linked to the stellar constellations which are situated in a belt of the heavens traversed annually by the sun, hence the prominent position of the sun in a grouping which Procter set in planetary space.
Arp was inspired by the organic and fluid shapes found in nature. Very interested in ancient mystic philosophy, he believed that nature expressed the dynamic force of life and wished to imitate this energy in his work: I tried to make forms grow, he wrote, I put my trust in the example of seeds, stars, clouds, plants, animals, men, and finally, in my innermost being.
Gallery label, September 2004
This portrait, and that of the sitters wife (displayed nearby) were designed as a pair. In both, the compositions and finely painted landscapes echo the work of the 16th-century Venetian painter Titian. Titians paintings were admired by the English king Charles I and his court, and greatly influenced van Dyck. Sir William was a courtier to Charles I and later a playwright. He is shown leaning meditatively against the base of a column. A ring, tied by a ribbon to his black satin jacket, may allude romantically to his wife, or denote mourning for a friend or relative.
Reinhardt's early work was Abstract Expressionist  in character but from 1949 he increasingly came to  believe in an absolutely pure, ordered and  balanced abstract art. This is one of the  so-called brick paintings in which he first began  to work out this vision. Ultimately he made  paintings which appeared to be pure black  monochromes, although they were made from a mix of  colours and had an underlying geometric structure.
In the late 1860s Moore, like many of his contemporaries, was influenced by Japanese art. He began to produce pictures which were almost entirely without subject, yet decorative and subtly coloured. Invariably they show women in classical robes, allowing him to concentrate on the colour, texture and movement of draped fabric.The Victorian poet Swinburne said such paintings are the worship of things formally beautiful ... their reason for being is simply to be. The flower-like device at the bottom of the picture is the symbol Moore used as a signature.
Araeen trained as a civil engineer, and his sculptures are constructed using geometric forms. Lovers combines two structures, each of which consists of a series of triangles that have been rotated and orientated in different ways. The work can be shown in two different configurations: either with the two parts next to each other, or on top of each other. This introduction of alternative possibilities challenges the idea of the artwork as a fixed object conceived by a single individual.
Small-scale group portraits like this, known as conversation pieces, projected an idealised vision of family life. This picture employs a pyramidal arrangement of the figures to express the structure of the family. Thomas Bradshaw (173374), a senior civil servant and politician, is shown at the apex of the pyramid. His family is arranged below him. The two women are Bradshaws wife, Elizabeth on the right, and, on the left, probably his sister. The two oldest sons are shown at the far left and right of the group. Their position in the composition serves to associate them both with the sheltered space of the family unit, and the outside world.
When he was young, Howard and his Royalist family were forced to leave England during the civil war. His grandfather, the Earl of Arundel, was the foremost patron and collector of art after the king, but his magnificent collection was dispersed as a result of the war. Howard returned to England after the Restoration of Charles II in 1660. He was appointed Ambassador-Extraordinary to Morocco in 1669, so the ships may refer to his mission. Soest was probably born in the Netherlands in about 1605, and seems to have arrived in England in the late 1640s.
In his later years, Burra was taken on driving  tours of Britain by his sister Anne. His landscapes were inspired by real places: in this case, a valley south of the Cheviot Hills near Alnwick. He said  he was fascinated by the lines on the hills that  play a dominant role in the painting. Such depictions of 'unspoilt' country were contrasted  with images of motorways and heavy trucks, reflecting the artist's lament at the destruction  of Britain. Others have found in such images suggestions of the human body, the rounded  hills perhaps suggesting buttocks or breasts.
This painting is based on a drawing Nash made in Toulon of electric globe ceiling lamps repeatedly reflected in the mirrored walls of a restaurant. Such circular motifs are commonly found in the work of many British artists in this period, for example, in Nicholson's abstract paintings and Moore's and Hepworth's sculptures. Nash included rounded shapes in many of his paintings, as a ball, or as a boulder on the ground, or as the moon.
For Agar, the unexpected juxtaposition of found objects was a form of inspired correction, a displacement of the banal by the fertile intervention of chance or coincidence. In Marine Object she brings together part of a Greek amphora that she retrieved from a fishermans net in the south of France with crustaceans and flotsam gathered on a beach two years earlier, and a rams horn from Cumbria. Agar described the making of Marine Object as short work... though it took me and the amphora a long time to attempt such a conjunction!
Queen Mab is described in Shakespeares Romeo and Juliet as the fairies midwife. She reveals secret hopes in the form of dreams, which she creates by driving her chariot over people as they sleep. Turner referred to A Midsummer Nights Dream, where Queen Mab is invoked during Titanias moonlight revels. He may also have read Shelleys poem Queen Mab. This painting was first exhibited in 1846. A reviewer called it a daylight dream in all the wantonness of gorgeous, bright, and positive colour, not painted but apparently flung upon the canvas.
The Backs were Matisses largest sculptures. Over twenty years he progressively refined the original pose, based on a woman leaning on a fence, until he achieved a massive simplicity. Matisses decision to show the back view of a woman on such a monumental scale was unorthodox. By concealing her face, he avoided the complexities of visual engagement between artist and model. This helped him to consider the nude as an arrangement of forms that he could simplify and stylise.
Sutherland was one of several painters commissioned by the War Artists Advisory Committee to record the devastation of the London Blitz. Having first studied the wrecked buildings in the City, in May 1941 he was sent to the badly bombed docklands area of the East End. In Wapping, close to Tower Bridge, he saw great rolls of paper in the wreckage of a warehouse and made drawings on which this painting was based. Sutherland often focused on such details, which became metaphors for the human damage he was not allowed to depict.
This design was made for Blake's poem called The Book of Urizen. The woman 

is Enitharmon, who in Blake's mythology symbolises Pity. In Urizen she is made pregnant by Los and 'groaning Produc'd 

a man Child to the light.'
Sir Henry Unton (?15571596), soldier and diplomat of Wadley in Berkshire, was knighted for his courage at the Battle of Zutphen in 1586. In 1591 he was to be sent as an ambassador to France, where he died five years later.The artist's name is not recorded, although the composition and handling recall that of portraits signed by Hieronimo Custodis. Custodis was born in Antwerp but came to England in the 1580s, perhaps as a religious exile. He was dead by 1593.A posthumous picture in the National Portrait Gallery by another unknown painter shows Unton surrounded by scenes from his life and death.
Richard Hamilton saw this image of an Irish loyalist Orangeman as the natural companion to The citizen. The Orangeman in full ceremonial rig is scarcely less extreme than is the blanket man, he said. Like the prisoner, the Orangeman is surrounded by human waste and devastation: the abstract image on the left panel is from an infra-red video still of an armoured car driving through streets of bomb wreckage. The title refers to the people of Northern Ireland being subjects of the British Crown.
The title of this picture refers to the annual commemoration on 19 April of the death of the great Conservative statesman Benjamin Disraeli (1804-81) who was Prime Minister in 1868 and from 1874-80. Primroses were said to be his favourite flower. The girl has been collecting primroses in her hat; others are arranged in a vase on the table, above which is a print of Disraeli. Bramley's picture is also an exercise in the colour harmonies of yellow, white and brown. A leading Newlyn painter, he has used the square brush and horizontal strokes for which the Newlyn artists were famous. Bramley was a founder member of the NEAC but resigned in 1890 after a vicious review of his work by Sickert. He was elected a Royal Academician in 1911.
This photograph documents the first performance of Time. A group of people stand in a line. The first person tells the time to the next person. They receive the time and hold on to it before announcing it to the next participant. The last person announces it to the world in the language of their choice. This image shows Time being performed in Les Arcs in the French Alps. It is currently taking place on the ramp of the Turbine Hall. Members of the public are invited to participate.
This work was previously owned by the Vorticist artist Helen Saunders. It was originally framed with a dark silver paper mount, which would have enhanced the mechanistic effect suggested by the harsh angular forms. As they lean precariously to one side, these forms also look like tottering architectural structures. Of all the Vorticists, Lewis was perhaps most consistently interested in the theme of the modern metropolis. The overall sensation of movement is achieved through the use of vertiginous, diagonal lines, which epitomise Lewis's Vorticist style. Despite the feeling of instability and agitation there is also a sense of order and strength of definition.
This large drawing depicts a procession of people including crippled and burdened workers, miners wearing helmets with torchlights, and a man in a cloth cap shouting into a megaphone, arranged in an arc-like frieze. The works subtitle refers to Haile Selassies pronouncement that modern Ethiopia should develop, catch up, even surpass the wealth of the Western world. Kentridges ironic interpretation of this slogan shows an ungainly parade of the dispossessed marching towards economic development.
In 1957 Lowry described the chance meeting which prompted him to paint this emotionally charged portrait of a young man: 'The head was done from my recollection of a young man I saw once in a Manchester park - a good while ago. He interested me very much at the time and stayed in my mind in a vague sort of way ever since. He gave me the impression that something had very badly gone wrong in his life tho' he gave no inkling of what it was in a fairly long conversation. He was totally disinterested in anything at all and yet was, to me most interesting - he was a peculiar young gentleman and I would have liked to have come across him again, I am sure I am right about him'.
Posenenske was interested in industrial methods of production, and produced free standing sculptures which often resemble standardised architectural units. Square Tubes Series D, consists of a number of folded, hollow elements which are joined together to create different shaped pieces, according to the owners decision. The tubes can be hung or placed on the floor in numerous configurations, and the physical organisation of the elements can be altered each time they are exhibited
This is among the most advanced in style of  Smith's paintings. It is one of a pair showing a  model in the same pose from two different points  of view, painted in his studio in Fitzroy Street.  'Nude No.2', which belongs to the British Council,  shows the model seen from the front, and has  slightly more detail in the background. Soon after  these were painted Smith, who had already joined  the Artists' Rifles, was called to France with the  army. After the war he painted little until his  stay in Cornwall in 1920.
In the upper part of Something of a World the artist transcribed his own poem in mirror-image with both hands simultaneously. The personal quality of hand-writing greatly appealed to CoBrA artists. The important thing, Alechinsky wrote, is to discover an inner script ... with which we can explore ourselves organically. Alechinsky said that he painted as if he was a spinning-top, unable to control his own movements. This is evident in The Night in which twists and twirls of white on a black ground evoke luminous night forms.
Chillida began to forge sculptures from solid iron in 1951. The darkness of iron, he suggested, was more suited to the sombre culture of his Basque homeland than more traditional sculptural materials such as plaster or marble. He believed that the final shape of the work could be determined only through the process of working directly with this resistant material. Discussing the group to which this work belongs, Chillida wrote that he sought a more fluid and modulated dialogue between material and space than in other works of mine.
The closing-time call, so familiar in British pubs, signals for the artist the arrival of Father Time, personified by the bearded figure whose hand is on the latch of the door. Walking towards the door as death beckons, Kokoschka turns momentarily and faces the viewer with one last, agonised stare, confronting the inevitability of his death. The vigorous paint handling and intensity of facial expression make this painting a particularly moving example of Kokoschka's late work, akin in its mixture of animation and psychological urgency to the late works of Picasso. Begun when Kokoschka was eighty-five years old, this is the last of his many self-portraits.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, July 2004
Hannah Starkey has described her photographs as exploring 'women's  lives through their everyday interactions'. In her staged scenes, actresses and  other hired models re-enact ostensibly insignificant and banal moments, of  the kind that often go unnoticed in daily life. By freezing such moments in time, Starkey hopes to elevate them above the mundane and create lasting allegories  for modern life. Her carefully planned  and directed compositions fuse influences from painting and cinema. However, she withholds the possibility of any narrative conclusion, leaving viewers to construct their own fictions around her images.
After 1885 the Montagne Sainte-Victoire, near his home in Aix-en-Provence, became Czannes favourite landscape motif. He painted it many times from different positions and under different light conditions. This view, which shows the mountain with a hooked outline, was painted from a steeply-terraced slope above his studio. He began with the shadows and with a touch, which he covered with a second more extensive touch, then with a third, until all these tints, forming a mesh, both coloured and modelled the object, the artist Emile Bernard later recalled.
Mack founded the Zero group with Otto Piene in 1957 in Dusseldorf, Germany. Zero felt their approach to art making, which used light and motion, opened up new forms of perception. In this relief, an aluminium disc decorated with a reed pattern rotates under glass that has been moulded with a similar pattern. The movement itself cannot be perceived, but the disc appears to dissolve into a rippling light. Through optical illusion, this seems to be continuously reforming itself as an oval while, at the same time, remaining a circle.
Hesse made drawings throughout her career. During 19641965 she was based in Germany as the guest of a textile manufacturer and collector who provided her with a studio space above his textile factory. Many of her drawings from this period, including this one, combine imagery which is principally abstract and organic with details that suggest machine parts and elements drawn from the factory environment.
Gallery label, July 2008
Orpen's portrait of his wife was painted while they were on a holiday at Margate with William and Mabel Nicholson and their children. They had been married only for a few years, and he portrayed her repeatedly. This portrait was studied by artificial light, and the stormy background added later, with its glimpse of sea and sand dune. The Orpens and Nicholsons loved to dress up. This conglomeration of gloves, scarf, veil, black ostrich feather and bonnet may not have been meant seriously, and Orpen often let loose his sense of humour in his private paintings. He was then just beginning his hardworking career as a society portrait painter, which was to lead to a great number of portraits of spectacular but prosaic realism.
Fini adored cats, and used the image of the Sphinx (a mythological hybrid of a lion and woman) partly as a self-portrait. She regarded the Sphinx as a symbolic intermediary between the human and animal realms, and between the conscious and the uncharted areas of the mind and spirit. In this painting, the Sphinx appears as a child-like, domesticated creature, sitting in front of its ramshackle home. The bird skull at its feet and the organ hanging in the doorway, however, hint at acts of violence.
Displayed here are two paintings: an unfinished landscape, thought to depict either Lake Lucerne from Brunnen or a stretch of the river Rhine; and a finished subject from Dido and Aeneas.

John Burnet described the unfinished works that Turner brought to the Royal Academy on Varnishing Days as divided into large masses of blue, where the water or sky was to come, [with] other portions laid out in broad orange yellow, falling into delicate brown where the trees and landscapes were to be placed (1852).  Turner would then add further representational details and local colour to complete the picture.
Table Piece CCLXVI is constructed on a human scale. At just over two metres wide it is comparable to the width of a persons outstretched arms. Caro has observed that: all sculpture is to do with the physical  all sculpture takes its bearings from the fact that we live inside our bodies and that our size and stretch and strength is what it is.
Amy Hislop became Henry Tate's second wife in 1883 at the age of thirty-five.  She was an extrovert, enjoying formal occasions, and it would appear that  she encouraged his philanthropy. After their marriage Tate made generous benefactions towards several public libraries in south London before offering his collection of sixty-five works of recent British art to the nation. Bavarian-born Hubert Von Herkomer was known for  his graphic illustrations as much as his portraits. His enjoyment of modern life was reflected in his passion for the motor car and experiments with film-making.
By the time of his death in 1910 the amateur painter Rousseau was acknowledged by Picasso and others as a naturally creative spirit. More than a decade later, his work was treasured by the Surrealists as evidence of the marvellous aspects of the unconscious. They were fascinated by his unconventional style and obsessive imagination, and Andre Breton had a still life comparable to this one beside his desk. It appeared to open a door into Rousseaus personal world, signalling a unique individuality.
This triptych is based on William Hogarths satirical series Marriage--la Mode (1743-5). Regos reinterpretation of this story of a failed marriage draws on her childhood in Portugal.On the left, two women arrange the marriage of the girl in white and the shy boy hiding behind his mother. A sinister sex scene seems a bad omen for their relationship. The central panel seems to satirise womans vanity. On the right, thirty years later, the husband has lost all their money in Brazil and is literally supported by his wife. The story is, perhaps, one of female suffering and fortitude.
Gauguin executed this harvest scene whilst staying at Le Pouldu in Cap Finistre, Brittany. He had been the central figure of a group of painters at the nearby village of Pont-Aven. Then in 1890 he moved to Le Pouldu in search of an even simpler way of life. By this time Gauguin had abandoned his early Impressionist manner. Influenced by folk art and primitive art, he began to use flat areas of colour and a distorted perspective in his paintings. The landscape and life of the peasant community inspired some of the most rugged and radically simplified works of his career.
Nauman began using taxidermists' moulds to make cast sculpture in the late 1980's. Cast in aluminium, these three animals are hybrids made by severing and reattaching heads and limbs to bodies in anatomically incorrect positions. The distorted forms suggest the products of a gruesome scientific experiment. Their suspension in mid-air reinforce the impression that they are somehow not of this world.
Many families left Britain during the 1840s and 1850s, forced to seek their fortune elsewhere by hardship and economic depression. Redgrave was one of several artists who recorded the plight of such emigrants. This picture was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1859 accompanied by lines from Oliver Goldsmith's poem 'The Traveller'. This begins: 'Have we not seen, round Britain's peopled shore, Her useful sons exchanged for useless ore?'. The village that the family prepare to leave is that of Abinger in Surrey, where Redgrave owned a cottage.
Advertising images have appealed to Burgin because they 'are used... deliberately in the service of ideology'. He has presented the photographs here not as a picture of real life but rather as a carefully coded sign, equivalent to written language. Each panel in this work shows the same image drawn from an advertisement for sherry. Burgin uses this to indicate an aspect of bourgeois ideology; material success is presented as something to aspire to. Burgin deliberately opposes this view of the world by including a prcis of a Maoist parable about the socialist worker, Lei-Feng. In addition, Burgin includes a commentary in each panel where he analyses the underlying meaning of image and text.
The theme of this painting is the role of the  artist. In the foreground the painter lies sleeping beside his paints and brushes and an unfinished watercolour of the landscape beyond. This artist figure may represent GW Allen, though it is not actually a self-portrait. In the middle distance  a group of friends are picnicking in the sunlight.  By contrast, the artist sleeps in the shade. He is shown as a figure apart, absorbed in a world of dreams and the instinctive desires represented  by the faun standing over him.
One of the recurrent themes of Deacon's work is the object as container and in this case the container is closed and impenetrable. The titles of Deacon's sculptures frequently refer to the senses: of sound, vision and touch. In this piece the title may refer to the hidden or silent interior. All of Deacon's works are abstract although they characteristically refer to natural and organic forms.
This painting shows an imaginary incident during the St Bartholomew's Day Massacre in Paris, when thousands of Protestants were slaughtered by Catholics. Millais shows  the pious devotion of a Catholic who is prepared to kill for his beliefs.
Smith studied at the Royal College of Art in  1954-7. In 1959 he won an award to study in  America for two years and 'Panatella' was painted  in New York. In terms of its large scale, abstract  shapes and vigorous brushwork, 'Panatella'  demonstrates connections with American painting of  the time. However, Smith's interest in mass media  and consumer culture is evident in the way that  the image is based on a cigar band. Also, as Smith  noted, 'the colour is rather tobacco and gold.'  One of Smith's concerns was to make connections  between 'high' art and popular culture. In this  respect 'Panatella' forms a link between abstract  painting and Pop art.
Davies paintings are characterised by a variety of personal pictograms, shapes and symbols that he has defined as primordial. He believes that they have many and varied meanings, which he leaves open to poetic interpretation and free association. Image of the Fish God has a totemic monumentality that evokes ancient cultures and shamanistic beliefs. The black form may be seen as figurative, and the central diamond is reminiscent of an all-seeing eye.
Bristol-born Marjorie Watson-Williams adopted the name Paule Vzelay while living in Paris between 1926 and 1939, during which time her work became increasingly abstract. One of only a handful of British artists that were members of the group Abstraction- Cration, Vzelay was interested in how art might convey new forms of political and spiritual understanding. Five Forms is one of a small group of white plaster sculptures made in 1935 and the use of simple, white, biomorphic forms suggests truth, beauty, harmony and clarity.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
William Mulready often painted themes of childhood and education. In this painting the master of a country school bows mockingly to a cringing late arrival, on the left. A birch lies in front of his desk, and in the foreground another pupil sits on a low stool, already in disgrace. Other boys lurk outside the door as if uncertain whether they dare to join the class at all. The landscape framed by the large window contrasts the nurture of the classroom with the world of nature  where the children would probably rather be.
Brown painted this landscape directly from nature. The setting is the Tenterden estate at Hendon, north London, looking east at twilight. He finished the final details in his studio, adding a self-portrait in the lower left corner. The effect he sought to capture was the way in which the brown hay was made to appear almost pink by contrast with the dense green grass. After it was finished his dealer rejected it on the grounds that he had never seen hay of this colour. Brown later retouched the painting before selling it to his friend and fellow artist William Morris.
The Rosenlaui glacier is at the foot of two spectacular Alpine peaks, including the Dossenhorn, and yet they are not the focus here. Instead Brett makes a meticulous study of different types of rocks and pebbles, offset by the dense blue white folds of the glacier itself. This attention to the detail as well as enormity of nature reflects the critic John Ruskins sentiment that a small stone was a mountain in miniature. Brett had travelled to Switzerland after reading Ruskins Of Mountain Beauty
and met the artist John William Inchbold who influenced him to paint all I could see.

From William Wordsworth, The Prelude, Book 6, Cambridge and the Alps, 1850

... The immeasurable heightOf woods decaying, never to be decayed,The stationary blasts of waterfalls,And in the narrow rent at every turnWinds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn,The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,Black drizzling crags that spake by the way-sideAs if a voice were in them, the sick sightAnd giddy prospect of the raving stream,The unfettered clouds and regions of the
Piper already had a reputation as a painter of historic architecture, in particular of ruined buildings, when he was commissioned to record war damage. He had painted in Bristol and the Houses of Parliament when Bath was bombed on the nights of 25, 26 and 27 April 1942 in some of the first Baedeker raids, so called because the targets were cultural rather than strategic and said to be selected from the pre-war Baedeker guide books. Piper went quickly to Bath when, he recorded, the ruins were still smouldering and bodies being dug out.
Gallery label, September 2004
Jacobean and Georgian church monuments are a frequent subject in Pipers sketches and paintings, and this work is an excellent example of his use of colour and light to create a romantic portrait of them, in which the figures almost come alive. The monument is in honour of Sir Thomas Spencer (died 1684), at Yarnton Church in Oxfordshire.
This is one of a series of paintings of the same  subject all done in 1953. The artist afterwards  destroyed the others. It was this particular theme  which prompted the label of 'Kitchen Sink'  painting - a description disliked by the painters  concerned. Smith has commented on his work of the  1950s 'The art of the 1940s in France and England  didn't excite me. I reacted against its lack of  creative energy. So like many artists before me I  turned to my own environment for subject matter  ... I wanted to make the ordinary miraculous. This  had nothing to do with social comment. If I had  lived in a palace I would have painted  chandeliers'.
This formal group portrait is a record of the dynastic union, through marriage, of the financially powerful Du Cane and Boehm families, both of Huguenot (exiled French Protestant) descent. Standing at the centre is Richard Du Cane, flanked by his family, including the couple whose marriage in 1735 united the two families: his daughter Jane and Charles Boehm. The portrait is among Hamiltons most ambitious compositions and shows why contemporaries regarded him as a serious rival to William Hogarth.
This painting depicts in a loose, impressionistic style, the view from the artists garden in Hammersmith, West London, which ran down to the river Thames. As well as the scenes location, its title makes reference to the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, now widely considered to be mythical. Pasmore researched the history of art and his Thames paintings are like tributes to Turner, Whistler and, here, Seurat. That the composition is based on geometric principles is clear and anticipates the abstract paintings that Pasmore began to produce the following year.
Gallery label, September 2004
Nicolete Gray was the daughter of Laurence Binyon,  poet and Keeper of Oriental Art at the British  Museum. She studied medieval history and in 1932  began the life long research into lettering which  led to her becoming a leading historian and  teacher of this subject and herself a lettering  artist. In 1936, she organised a contemporary art  exhibition 'Abstract and Concrete'. This included  work by Ben Nicholson, Hepworth and Moore, but  also introduced to the British public the work of  foreign abstract artists such as Calder, Gabo,  Giacometti, Kandinsky, Mir and Mondrian. Nicolete  Gray enjoyed a long and fruitful friendship with  David Jones. She wrote a monograph on his  inscriptions in 1981 and a book on his paintings  in 1989. Large painted inscriptions were an  important part of Jones's later work, beginning  around 1943. The Latin texts that Jones has chosen  here refer to Christmas. 'Exiit Edictum' comes  from the account of Christ's birth in St Luke's  Gospel, and the separate line of 'Iam Redit  Apollo' comes from Virgil's Fourth Eclogue, which  Christian writers believed prophesied Christ's  birth. Nicolete Gray stated that this inscription  is innovatory in two ways; firstly that Jones's  preferred coloured background and wax crayon  technique have been replaced by letters in  different colours on white paper; and secondly  Jones introduces here his practice of combining  fragments from different texts, so as to give  visual form to a complex of inter-related meaning.
This replica of a Native American head-dress  was made from sheet metal taken from a car door, an ironing board and washing machine.  A manufacturer''s logo is still visible on the top of one feather. ''The idea came from seeing a child''s toy head-dress and thinking about how far that image had travelled from its original form and place'', Woodrow explains. He was interested in the idea of a traditional, Native American culture confronting the trappings of consumer society, and the way in which many Native Americans  now live a westernised life. The thin metal strips joining the objects together literally express this interweaving of two cultures.
Since the early 1990s Sarah Lucas  has challenged sexual stereotypes in  a variety of provocative works. In this  series of self-portraits she turns against the art-historical tradition of the female seductress or muse, and presents  herself in a deliberately androgynous,  and occasionally aggressive, series of poses. She adopts masculine gestures  and stances, and shows herself in unisex clothing like jeans and T-shirts. These images also raise questions about the  role and appearance of the modern  artist. In contrast to the clich of the  artist as an anguished male, Lucas  shows herself as an ordinary person  in emphatically ordinary surroundings.
This is one of only a few group portraits by Gainsborough, who generally preferred to paint individuals. The sitters on either side are probably Charles Crockatt and Peter Darnell Muilman, the sons of rich merchants who had recently acquired fine estates in Essex. The man playing the flute in the centre is William Keable, a minor portrait painter who taught the young gentlemen music and drawing. In this early painting, Gainsborough fuses his three great interests in life: portraiture, landscape painting and music.
Gallery label, September 2004
This work was inspired by Spencers visit to a wool shop with his friend Daphne Charlton while staying in rural Gloucestershire at the end of the 1930s. It originates in a series of drawings of Charlton and himself and was made in the wake of his turbulent relationship with his second wife, Patricia Preece, and after leaving his former home at Cookham in Berkshire. Spencer later recalled that Stonehouse had several of these small local shops such as I remembered years ago in Cookham. The Cookham ones must have emigrated there.
Moore tended to find inspiration for his work in natural forms. Although cast in plaster, this sculpture has the appearance of a pebble or piece of worn bone, an indefinable organic form that takes on the identity of some hybrid animal. The ghostly, grotesque quality of Animal Head, like other works by Moore, carries connotations of decay and mortality.
The Magdalena portraits relate to a series of paintings that Dumas exhibited in Venice in 1995. In these earlier works, the artist combined images of the model Naomi Campbell taken from fashion photographs, with Flemish depictions of the repentant Mary Magdalen, her naked body concealed beneath long hair. The fusion of such strongly contrasting imagery is a significant aspect of Dumas' working process. 'I use religious subjects as I use fairy-tale figures, in order to give my audience an easy starting point, a popular reference that relates to all times and that is familiar to most people', Dumas has explained.
The image of a seated adult with children 

or youths reading occurs in a number 

of Blake's works from the 1780s, including 

the title page to Songs of Innocence.
The Magdalena portraits relate to a series of paintings that Dumas exhibited in Venice in 1995. In these earlier works, the artist combined images of the model Naomi Campbell taken from fashion photographs, with Flemish depictions of the repentant Mary Magdalen, her naked body concealed beneath long hair. The fusion of such strongly contrasting imagery is a significant aspect of Dumas' working process. 'I use religious subjects as I use fairy-tale figures, in order to give my audience an easy starting point, a popular reference that relates to all times and that is familiar to most people', Dumas has explained.
Gwen John trained at the Slade School of Art in London, where her brother Augustus was also a student. She settled in Paris in 1904, working as a model and immersing herself in the artistic world of the city. She lived in France for the rest of her life, exhibiting on both sides of the Channel. The portrait shown here is of a Paris friend, Chlo Boughton-Leigh. The subdued colouring, short foreground and self-absorption of the sitter create a deeply intense atmosphere.
This painting was exhibited in the open section (aperto) of the Venice Biennale in 1990. It is representative of an early phase of Rae's work in terms of its clarity of form and colour, unbalanced composition and disjointed motifs. Much of the canvas is left blank. As a result the marks themselves encourage more concentrated examination. Rae paints in a variety of manners, sometimes applying paint thickly and at others very thinly and flatly. Although she observes closely the styles of other artists she avoids parody by weaving them together in such a way as to transform them.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
With its ready supply of coal and iron ore, Shropshire was at the heart of the acceleration of Britains industrial economy from the middle of the 18th century. Here, Munn shows a scene of local industry with great attention to detail, both of the buildings and of atmospheric effects. The picture could be said to be an attempt at a kind of industrial version of the Picturesque the ideal of variety and irregularity which had influenced images of rural life in previous decades.
These delicate, watery images are distinctly sexual in appearance, though the shapes occurred by chance. Although body parts are suggestive, the title actually derives from the medium with which the works have been made. Describing the process, Parker says: I dissolved pornographic video tapes in solvent and made Rorschach blots with the stain. The video tapes were shredded by the Customs and Excise who decide what should be taken out of circulation. Im making you look at them again but theyve become an abstraction...I just dropped these blots of ink onto paper and folded it. I didnt dictate what images appeared.
This is one of a few paintings of Venice which Turner may have begun in the 

hope of generating commissions. 

It remained unfinished.
This picture was exhibited at an exhibition called War Pictures at the National Gallery in 1941. It was also reproduced in the exhibition catalogue. In his catalogue essay, the critic Eric Newton compared 

the war between Germany and Britain 

to 'the fundamental opposition between the sea's restless power and the land's opposing firmness'. The wave-like undulations of the figures lying in the foreground of the drawing and the vertical cliff of figures on the bunks correspond remarkably with Newton's analogy.
Rossetti once described Malory's Morte d'Arthur as one of the greatest books in the world and drew inspiration from it for a number of his designs. Here he unites two scenes from the text. One relates to Percival, who achieves the Grail quest with his fellow knights, Galahad and Bors. The other relates to his sister who gives her life to heal a woman who could only be saved by the blood of a virgin. Rossetti shows the knights receiving the Grail before an altar. Beside them Percival's sister lies on the ground awaiting burial. The lily symbolises her purity.
Though the painting of flowers has been stereotyped as the preserve of women artists,  Nicholson uses it here not as an expression of femininity, but as a pretext for experiments in technique.  Like many progressive artists at this time she adopts a nave or primitive style in an attempt to unlearn traditional picture-making habits and generate a fresh vision of the subject.  Nicholson innovatively combines the two genres of still life and landscape, aiming at personal expression through her use of space, shapes and colour
Giacometti related this work to his memory of sitting in a Paris brothel and seeing four naked women at the far end of the room. The distance which separated us, the polished floor, seemed insurmountable in spite of my desire to cross it and impressed me as much as the women, he recalled. The tiny size of the figures and the heavy base with sloping sides, which suggests a receding floor, recreates the sense of distance and confrontation experienced by the artist.
Extremely few British paintings of religious subjects have survived from the 16th century. After the Reformation, Protestant unease about images meant it would have been highly controversial to display either religious paintings or alabasters. The inscription at the bottom, in English, warns against the evil of worldly vanity. Instead it urges prayer to ensure the safe passage of the soul to heaven. The resurrected Christ appears at the top. Below him, at the centre, is Man, shielded by Christian and moral virtues against attacks from all sides by the Seven Deadly Sins.
The Austrian artist Marianne Stokes was based in Britain and enjoyed an international career; her work brought together many ideas in European art, past and present. Candlemas Day was made after working in Holland and recalls Johannes Vermeer as well as more modern impressionist images of Dutch country girls. The subject was also influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites and Stokes was part of the revival of medieval egg tempera paint, applied in tiny strokes, which created the pale, pure effect here.
Although he trained as a painter, Jarman was best known as a film-maker and a campaigner for gay rights. He was diagnosed HIV positive in 1986, and became an outspoken critic of the homophobia that surrounded the discussion of AIDS. The title of this work, Ataxia, refers to the loss of physical control experienced by the artist when his illness attacked his central nervous system. Its brightly coloured thick surface is the result of the paint having been spread directly with the fingers after the deterioration of Jarmans eyesight.
These sketches are for works both realised and unrealised. Sketch (1917) is reminiscent of several reliefs made in the 1920s, and has been compared to Gabo's 1925 Model for 'Rotating Fountain' (on display here). Sketch (1918-19) is for a relief that would have been composed of intersecting planes protruding from a wall or reaching across a corner. Gabo's aim to make a public art that could play a role in the new society promised by the Russian Revolution is reflected by First Sketch for a Monument(1919) Sketch for a Kinetic Construction (1922) demonstrates his radical introduction of real movement to articulate space.
Hamiltons image of a patrolling British soldier expresses the unease of the armys equivocal position in Northern Ireland. Brandishing a weapon, yet moving protectively backwards, he is both on the offensive and defensive. The rural Irish landscape and city streets behind him pose equal threats. Hamilton has incorporated real fabric into the soldiers fatigues, merging pictorial representation and reality. The construction of images through costume and artifice has been a consistent concern in Hamilton's works.
Hartung developed a vigorously gestural and linear  style in the early 1930s. Believing that painting  should record and evoke his immediate inner  experiences, tensions and energies, he rejected  observation and memory as possible starting points  and relied instead on spontaneous feeling and  direct physical action. He thereby anticipated by  many years the post-war development of what became  known as Art Informel and was widely influential  during this period. This painting was made by  scratching rhythmic and sweeping lines into the  top layer of a vinyl coating before it dried.  Hartung developed this particular technique in the  early 1960s.
The title of this painting refers to a Chinese acrobat doll that Uglow copied to arrange the subject's athletic stance. Uglow has an exacting approach to the nude, suppressing emotional content in favour of 'visual truth'. His method of observation is painstaking and intense, as evidenced by the small marks of measurement on the figure, a technique inherited from his teacher William Coldstream, whose work is also in this room. These marks have become an integral part of Uglow's work - in the places where they remain visible, they emphasise the flatness of the picture surface.
Blows concern with the material of her paintings is demonstrated here by her use of liquid cement to which she added, among other things, chaff and charcoal. Her improvisatory approach links her work to what the French critic Michel Tapi called Art Informel. It is an approach she had encountered through the Italian Alberto Burri. The fact that Blow had spent several years in Cornwall close to the painter Peter Lanyon, as well as the inclusion of organic material, has led such works to be associated with landscape.
Brazilian artist Camargo lived in Paris from 1961 to 1974. While living there he made a number of monochrome white works composed of cylindrical pieces of diagonally cut wood, including Large Split Relief. These reliefs, which resemble crystalline growth, generate a play of light and shadow across their surface to explore the organic and rhythmic disposition of the wooden pieces. At the same time, the work highlights the natural material roughness of the wood creating a dialogue between the organic textures of nature and the carefully crafted character of art.
Picabia associated himself with the subversive, anti-rational Dada movement, and made this work during a visit to Zurich when he first met fellow Dadaists Tristan Tzara and Jean Arp. In inking-up the cogs of a clock (a key Swiss product), Picabia undermined the rational measuring of time upon which the social order was based. Conversation, made three years later, also links the measurable (the carefully delineated stripes) and the sensual (the nude female torsos).
During the late 1950s Giacometti made a number of fragmentary figures, their arms partly or entirely missing. Their slender, emaciated forms convey a vivid but fragile human presence. The writer  Jean Genet commented: 'The resemblance of  his figures to each other seems to me to represent that precious point at which human beings are confronted with the most irreducible fact: the loneliness of being exactly equivalent  to all others.'
The location of this building on the edge of a  bluff, and the general massing of land and sea  strongly tie it to Dunstanburgh Castle as  represented by Turner in his view of the ruin for  his 'England and Wales' series. It may well be  that here the painter merely indicated the castle  in an extremely summary form, as we know he did  with other buildings elsewhere (no.27). If this is  Dunstanburgh, then a dawn scene is depicted as in  the 'England and Wales' drawing, although the  demarcation between sea and sky that should be  apparent on the extreme right is somewhat lost in  a mass of dark tones.
Gleizess abstract paintings tend to retain strong links with the figures or still life subject matter that inspired them. Here the image may be based on a female head, possibly that of the artists wife. According to this interpretation, the central image is frontal, showing the face in a fashionable cloche hat with a scarf; the second concentric set is the head again, closer, and the third gives an idea of the hair, concealed in the hat.
This portrait was probably commissioned to celebrate the marriage of Catherine Moore to Charles Warwick Bampfylde 

in 1776. Lady Bampfylde's pose is a witty adaptation of the famous classical statue, the Venus de' Medici (illustrated to the 

left) then regarded as the embodiment 

of female beauty. In the classical statue 

the goddess's hands are positioned over her breasts and genitalia, simultaneously emphasising her modesty and her sexual potency. Here Reynolds has slightly lowered the left arm, while the right arm, gesturing towards the white lilies, casts 

an artful shadow across the area of the figure's lower torso.
This drawing and the sculpture shown nearby date from early in Paolozzi's career. The drawing was made in London where Paolozzi had settled after a formative stay in Paris from 1947-9. There he had been drawn particularly to Surrealism with its rejection of conventional ideas of beauty, and its aim to make art directly from 'the depths of the mind'. In painting and drawing, this aim was often achieved by employing a free and improvisatory approach which would encourage a direct statement of inner feelings. The results, as here, were often akin to graffiti, or the art of the insane, or to 'primitive' or naive art. All of these were admired by artists such as Paolozzi for their freedom and directness of expression.
Patrick Caulfield, a painter and printmaker since the 1960s, shares Pop art's detached and ironic view of the world in his pictures, which mix vivid, everyday scenes with bold designs. The Tate has built up a broad collection of his graphic work.  This new screenprint is a play on Picasso's famously confrontational painting depicting prostitutes,  Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, which marked the  beginning of Cubism. Caulfield has reversed Picasso's image so that instead of viewing the women frontally, we peer at them from behind.  The reversal of this image is both a visual pun on the printing process, which reverses the original design, and a verbal pun on the French word  derrire, which means rear end.
Kolrov has arranged paperclips in regular columns, but has made slight alterations 
so that the outline of a large paperclip can be detected, wittily conflating her chosen material and the object it represents. She began making assemblages of this kind 
in the late 1960s using everyday objects 
such as snap fasteners and razor blades. 
As in this work, through small, almost imperceptible changes to the placement 
of the items, a new image is created 
within an otherwise minimalist composition.
Many of Oldenburgs sculptures transform household objects through radical changes of scale, encouraging the viewer to see ordinary items in a new light. This is one of a series of works, made in different sizes and using different materials, based on an American electrical plug. Others have been made in Bakelite, cardboard and masonite. This suspended, mahogany version was associated by the artist with the hanging lights inside the Hagia Sophia mosque in Istanbul.
Hockney creates scenes of touching intimacy  in these simple etchings depicting homosexual love. They were made to illustrate poems by the modern Greek poet CP Cavafy, whose 'directness and simplicity' Hockney hugely admired. Although there is no explicit narrative, the backdrops  of hotels and foreign shops suggest chance sexual encounters.
Cohen first became involved with computer drawing  in 1968, shortly after moving from London to  Southern California to take up a one-year  professorship at the University of California, San  Diego. The following year the professorship was  made permanent. In California, Cohen began to  investigate the use of computers as a creative  tool. Between 1973 and 1975 Cohen worked at the  Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of Stanford  University, Connecticut, where he began to 'write  programs which would, in some important respects,  do what human artists do when they make images'.  The black ink outlines of the abstract shapes of  'Untitled Computer Drawing' were created  automatically by a computer using one such  programme. The forms were then hand-coloured.
Hepworth said that when she was carving this sculpture she was preoccupied with thoughts about Africa and the United Nations, explaining that her concern for human suffering and dignity had on occasion lent a certain poignancy to her works. It was linked more specifically to her sense of sorrow after the 1960 Sharpeville Massacre, when South African police opened fire on demonstrators, killing 69 people. The sculpture appears to represent a human head, heroic in stature and proportion, and emblematic of the universality of suffering.
This painting refers to Parsifals defeat of the evil knight Ither, whose name appears beside his broken, blood-spattered sword. Parsifals mother, Herzelayde, had tried to raise her son in ignorance of the violent chivalry of his ancestors. Her efforts failed, however, and Parsifal, whose sword is depicted here as gleaming and intact, went on to become a knight. Kiefer may have seen a parallel between Parsifals peaceful upbringing and the attitude of the post-war generation in Germany, scarred by the brutality of their countrys recent history.
Around 1970 Kelly began to experiment with unconventional arrangements of shapes. This strategy advanced his aim to create painting/sculptures which interrelated with their surrounding space. In this work, the configuration of the square and rectangle creates distinct angles. The negative space of the wall, produced through the meeting of the two canvases, extends the field beyond their painted surfaces.
Gallery label, July 2008
Hockney made this etching a year or so after he began to experiment with printmaking at the Royal College of Art. Etching, he says, appealed to him because the art school supplied free materials at a time when he could not afford to buy paint. Hockney also used this essentially linear medium to combine images and words, creating a kind of pictorial graffiti with coded references to friends and lovers. As Hockney said of such images, 'they were partly propaganda of something I felt hadn't been propagandised as a subject: homosexuality.'
Leopardskin Nuclear Bomber No.2 combines the imagery of predatory beasts and nuclear weaponry. This association between nuclear and animal aggression focuses on the self-destructive forces that Self believes govern human behaviour. Nails protruding from the nose section emphasise the hostile, sinister nature of the work. The elongated pink fuselage of the plane is overtly phallic, carrying connotations of sexual aggression. This work exemplifies the mood of anxiety and menace that informs Selfs work of the early 1960s.
Gilbert & Georges art is a form of self-portraiture, since they almost always feature in their own work. They have said that its all one big portrait. They see no separation between their activities as artists and their everyday existence. In 1969, they began to present themselves as living sculptures and developed the mask-like personas that are presented here. The title of this work suggests a painting rather than a video, and the slowed-down action suggests the long, scrutinizing gaze of an artist examining his model.
The idea for Amoeba came from the artists memories of the tadpoles she played with in 
a river near her childhood home. The roughly-modelled organic form of the sculpture resembles a living creature, and the large swelling may be an allusion to pregnancy. Herself a mother, Bourgeois has made many works that explore themes of pregnancy and motherhood. For me, sculpture is the body, she has said. My body is my sculpture.
Sam Francis was born in San Mateo, California and studied at the California School of Fine Arts. In 1947 the Abstract Expressionist painters Mark Rothko and Clyfford Still visited the school and their influence on the development of Francis's work is apparent. In the early 1950s he lived in Paris, and subsequently travelled widely. He was therefore not directly connected with the New York-based artists who spearheaded Abstract Expressionism. Even so, he exhibited with those artists and gained international recognition. This work was painted after a visit to Japan. Its characteristic use of colours floating in space fuses painterly gesture with Francis's interest in the notion of the void, derived from Oriental thought.
This is a work which plays on tension and  illusion. The tall steel ladder was retrieved from  a scrap heap. The cable ladder looks as though it  could be the shadow of the steel ladder, but its  form is more wayward. The sculpture was made for  an exhibition in Israel. The title is a map  reference. The artist relates that he asked a  student in Israel if one could locate the place of  Jacob's dream as related in the Bible (Genesis  28,10). 'Oh yes he said, I'll have it for you  tomorrow morning, and that gave the work its  title; fable and military precision in one'.  Jacob's dream was of a ladder from earth to  heaven.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
Turner produced many studies of Dolbadarn Castle  and its surroundings both during and after his  excursion of 1799. He had, however, first seen and  drawn the subject during his Welsh tour of the  previous year. This study was produced in the wake  of the earlier visit, anticipating the scale and  atmosphere of the later Welsh works.
The elements shown in this vitrine were acquired by Tate as individual works. Beuys later decided to place them together to match the groups of objects in the other two vitrines, which he had designed himself. Several of the sculptures incorporate bronze castings of a female torso, originally carved in wood by Beuys. In Bathtub for a Heroine, the figure is combined with an electric element and a copper cast of a mammoth's tooth. In Animal Woman, she seems to merge with a piece of industrial piping; while in Bed she floats suspended between the jaws of a clamp. Fat Battery consists of various fat and felt elements, combined by Beuys to suggest the shape and function of a battery, reflecting his concern with the generation and storage of energy.
Due to the precision of his technique, Tanguy worked very slowly. A Thousand Times is one of the more substantial canvases from a year in which he only completed about ten paintings. It was a period of poverty which forced him to give up his studio. The threatening atmosphere of the painting may reflect these personal circumstances, as well as the bleak economic and political climate of Europe in the early 1930s.
This study shows the view from the forecourt of Flatford Mill across a side stream of the river Stour in Suffolk, which had been diverted under the mill to work the water-wheel. The water churned up by the water-wheel left the mill through an archway below the forecourt, which explains the turbulence seen in the foreground of the sketch. The house is Willy Lotts House, named after the tenant farmer who lived there for over 80 years. It appears in several of Constables finished paintings, the most famous of which is The Haywain 1821 (now in the National Gallery).
The simplified, angular planes and exaggerated features of this nude suggest the influence  of carved figures. Matisse's interest in African  art began around 1906, and is probably reflected in this painting. Based on a photograph rather than a model, it subverts the tradition of the academic studio nude. The austere colours are  a departure from the brightness of Matisse's earlier Fauvist period.
By the early nineteenth century the open landscape of Hampstead Heath, north of London, was increasingly appreciated as a refuge from the ever more crowded and polluted city. This is one of many views 

of the Heath that Constable painted. 

His picture revels in the wildness of the landscape, both in the choice of scene and in the freedom of his painting style. 

It was created for his friend, the actor 

Jack Bannister, who, the artist reported, wanted a landscape in which he could 'feel the wind blowing on his face'.
This subject is taken from a poem The Ballad of Oriana by Alfred Tennyson. Oriana stands on the wall of a castle, watching her betrothed in battle below. An arrow aimed at him goes astray and she is killed instead.Frederick Sandys was influenced by the Pre-Raphaelites and the meticulous technique of this work shows that he shared their interest in fifteenth-century Flemish painting, in particular the work of Rogier van der Weyden and Jan van Eyck. The bridge in this picture which suggests a European setting was actually based on the Bishops bridge in Norwich, Norfolk.
This is one of a series of lithographs made by Nauman involving word-play. The artist has drawn the palindrome, 'Raw-War' repeatedly in a semi-transparent perspective grid. There are four receding parallel rows of the same three letters, and in the first, the letter R is reversed, so that the first row may be read as RAW or WAR. In the second row 'War' may only be read backwards and similar reversals take place in the other two rows. This is one of Nauman's first lithographs, and relates to an earlier neon sign work, which flashes orange and red. Nauman uses the association of colour, sound and image to enrich and to broaden meaning. He has acknowledged that there is a political dimension to this work.
Deacon has long been interested in using unusual materials and developing techniques in response to them. Here the fine bands of brass, cut into curves, enclose layers of foam. The prominent chrome rivets hold the construction together and encourage us to see its rhythmic qualities. Since 1982 Deacon has made more than fifty sculptures in the series Art For Other People. They share an exploration of materials whose qualities are readily understood and often  as here with brass and foam  contrasting or complementary.
Francis Als The Nightwatch was made by releasing a fox into Londons National Portrait Gallery and following its movement through the galleries using the museums CCTV system. The installation itself mimics the wall of monitors in a surveillance station. Als was inspired partly by the proliferation of surveillance cameras around London, and by the number of urban foxes forced to lead a scavenger existence in the city.
La Thangue was well-known for his realist rustic scenes. Here, uncharacteristically, he introduces a symbolic dimension to his work. A mother discovers that her young daughter has died, presumably after an illness. At the same moment, a man arrives at the gate carrying a scythe, the traditional symbol of death, the grim reaper.This rather melodramatic treatment can be compared with the more grimly realistic picture of child death Hushed, by Frank Holl, also shown in this room.
Gallery label, September 2004
Not much is known about Fitzgerald. He is generally remembered today for his pictures of fairyland, this one probably being the example shown at the Royal Academy in 1866. Other paintings by him depict humans deep in sleep, conjuring up in their dreams a fantastic world of elves, sprites and devils similar to the creature shown here astride the wings of a bat, attempting to spear an innocent water-sprite. Fitzgerald also executed a series of large fairy subjects for Christmas editions of 'The Illustrated London News'.
The Magdalena portraits relate to a series of paintings that Dumas exhibited in Venice in 1995. In these earlier works, the artist combined images of the model Naomi Campbell taken from fashion photographs, with Flemish depictions of the repentant Mary Magdalen, her naked body concealed beneath long hair. The fusion of such strongly contrasting imagery is a significant aspect of Dumas' working process. 'I use religious subjects as I use fairy-tale figures, in order to give my audience an easy starting point, a popular reference that relates to all times and that is familiar to most people', Dumas has explained.
While living for part of the time at Isleworth, Turner made many excursions along the river, drawing, painting and fishing  his favourite hobby.  He kept a boat, and often stopped overnight at various landing-places.  He also painted on board, as here on small wood panels and sometimes, more ambitiously, on canvas.

Painting in oils in the open air, direct from the subject, was becoming popular in the early nineteenth century, in response to a growing feeling for naturalism.  Turners oil sketches of the Thames painted around 1805 show him at the forefront of the trend.
Gallery label, September 2004
The narrative element in Kitaj's painting  is frequently informed by a delight in the free-association of ideas and images. Kitaj has explained that in this work 'the three main actors represent myself in youth, middle-age and old-age. Behind them  is a drop-curtain inscribed with historiated capital letters of cities where I've lived or loved... The catwalk stage on which the figures tread and stumble through life becomes the roof of a baseball dugout  in which I've tried half-heartedly to  draw some of my demons (Don't Ask!), colourless spectres only thinly isolated from the three leading players above.'  The idea for the painting came from a magazine illustration of a scene from 'an experimental drama' by Thornton Wilder.
'When I am writing' Kay has said, 'I always imagine myself in some kind of virtual computer environment and think of my memory works as hypertexts'. Worldview is one such 'memory work', in which Kay attempts to chronicle the history of the world using only her own memories 

as a reference.
Hannah and George Osborne, aged here about nine and six respectively, were the natural children of Dr John Ranby, physician to the royal household and a friend and neighbour of Hogarth in Chiswick. George was brought up as Ranbys heir and changed his name to John Ranby by royal license in 1756. Although he was childless, Hogarth had a deep sympathy for children, especially those disadvantaged by poverty or the circumstances of their birth. In 1740 he became a leading light in Londons Foundling Hospital, which cared for orphaned children: he and his wife also acted as foster parents.
Hepworth and her husband Ben Nicholson were key figures in the modern movement in Britain in the 1930s. Their circle became increasingly important as European artists such as Naum Gabo and Piet Mondrian fled to London. This work relates to her interest in situating sculpture in the landscape: an early image showed it superimposed onto a photograph of a garden. The sculpture has an upward growth but the curves of the two monoliths make a closed composition which, in the open, with light all round, they create a quietness, a pause in the progress of the eye, Hepworth said.
Struth has photographed visitors in some of the best known museums in Europe and America. He is fascinated by the culture of museum visiting and by the ways in which visitors and the museum respond to and affect each other. Key elements in Struths Museum Pictures are light, space and architecture, both in galleries themselves and in the pictures they display. He is especially interested in how spectators movements affect these formal aspects through pose, grouping and gesture.
While studying at St Martin's School of Art from  1969-72, Deacon made some performance works, but  he abandoned these and began to fabricate solid  objects a few years later. His work uses a wide  variety of materials and processes, and includes  figurative and cultural references. 'If The Shoe  Fits' is one of a series of works by Deacon  inspired by Rainer Maria Rilke's poems 'Sonnets to  Orpheus.' Deacon became interested in forms that  were 'a hollow enclosure with an opening...that  [could] stand for the head of Orpheus singing or  listening...or for other, very domestic objects,  particlarly pots and pans, shoes, hats.'
Huebler's site sculptures explore ideas of location, documented through photography, maps and text. He only spent a day at Windham College in Vermont. Using a map, he drew a pentagon with the campus as its centre and then proceeded to collect earth from the locations that correspond to its five points. Mixed with resin, the samples were shown at Windham College with documentary materials. After the exhibition, they were reburied on campus.
This painting is part of an early series of works by Delaunay on the subject of the city. It was inspired by a postcard photograph of the rooftops of Paris taken from the top of the Arc de Triomphe and looking towards the Eiffel Tower. It appears to have been a study for a more finished painting which is now known only in reproduction, and which included the Eiffel Tower at the top of the composition. It is possible that this study also originally included the Eiffel Tower at the top and was at some point cut down by the artist.
This painting was commissioned in 1815 by the Revd FH Barnwell, a Suffolk antiquary who took a particular interest in the village of Brightwell near Ipswich. It shows the view looking north towards the church and includes, on the right, a farm formed from the outbuildings of the demolished Brightwell Hall. Constable rarely undertook commissions of this kind and the result is unlike any of his other works. It is as small as the oil sketches he made for his own reference, but as highly finished as any of his exhibition pictures.
The subject of this sculpture is a woman, seated with her legs crossed. The tall block is part of the head, and was added, according to the artist, 'to give value to the head, the back of the head.' This plaster was cast from a stone carving, which the artist said he carved himself rather than asking his assistant to copy from the model. There is a network of pencil crosses over the shellac surface, which mark 'points' for another carved copy to be made.
Paolozzi describes this sculpture, part cityscape, part elaborate machine, as an urban image. The wheel, a recurring motif in his work, symbolises technology. Instead of using existing pieces of scrap metal, as he had in earlier sculptures, he started from scratch with this work. He designed a series of geometric units made from wax, then a team of assistants cast them in aluminium, before welding and painting them according to his instructions. This process, in which the artist is removed from the actual manufacturing, has been called industrial collage.
The figure of a clarinet player emerges from a series of block-like forms in this sculpture. Musical subject matter was typical of early works by the cubists Picasso and Braque, and the angular facets of this work suggest a relationship to the geometric shapes of cubist painting. The work also reflects the aesthetic ideals of purism, a movement which began after the First World War and sought to develop aspects of cubism, emphasising simplicity and harmony.
This work belongs to a series of eight busts that Giacometti made of his wife Annette from 1962 to 1965. Although Annette was one of his most frequent sitters, Giacometti found himself approaching her anew each time she posed. The surfaces of the sculptures were heavily worked and he commented that after three days of working she doesnt resemble herself any more. Giacomettis obsessive approach to his work is reflected in his observation that Its rather an unusual thing for a person to spend more of his time trying to copy a head than living life.
This is one of many watercolours Blake made  for his most important patron, Thomas Butts.  It was painted during Blake's stay in Felpham, Sussex when, in his own words, he put himself 'back as if I was a learner' and gave 'two years  to the intense study of... light & shade & colour.'  By comparing this work with the earlier temperas Blake painted for Butts, some of which are  shown in this room, we can get an idea of  the improvements Blake was aiming at in his  art: a renewed power of design (seen in the  symmetrical composition with its energetic,  flowing outlines), dark shadows rejected  in favour of more uniformity between light  and shade, and greater radiance in his colours.
In Marilyn Monroe, Warhol found a fusion of two of his consistent themes: death and the cult of celebrity. The star died tragically in August 1962.  In the following two years, Warhol made thirty silkscreen paintings of her, always using the same publicity photograph from the 1953 film Niagara. This set of ten screenprints was produced in 1967, in an edition of 250. The repeated image serves as the basis for a series of startling colour transformations.
Since the mid-1970s Sherman has been making portraits featuring herself in a myriad of guises and situations. Paradoxically, her intention is to encourage self-reflection in the viewer: 'I'm trying to make other people recognise something of themselves rather than me', she explains. In these photographs, she appears as a model covering herself up after posing for a nude centrefold. Her sometimes wounded, sometimes confrontational gaze suggests exploitation rather than glamour.
The Moveable Shoulder Extensions extend over the arms, functioning as dramatic prostheses. As Horn wrote, the two black sticks are tied onto both shoulders and across the chest []. Each step the performer takes is transmitted from his legs up to both shoulder extensions, and is in turn reflected in obverse scissor-like movements in the air. Just like Unicorn and the masks, this body-sculpture hangs on the wall at the height at which it was worn on the day of the performance (included in the film Performances I 1972).
This large plate reproduces one of the most important and influential canvases of Turner's later career. Exhibited at the Royal Academy early in 1836, 'Juliet and her Nurse' became the subject of a vicious attack by the Reverend John Eagles in an article published in 'Blackwood's Magazine' later in the year. Eagles wrote that the picture was 'a strange jumble', but one of his chief complaints was that Turner should have chosen to set this scene from 'Romeo and Juliet' in Venice rather than Verona. No doubt Turner's decision to place Shakespeare's famous heroine in Venice was influenced by the romantic atmosphere of the city; in the foreground she is seen musing on her new-found love.
This painting is named after Tuesday Weld, a young screen actress who began her career in the early 1960s and became one of the sex symbols of the day. Blake selected her as the subject of this painting because of her unusual first name. Two photographs of her are included at the top of the painting. The three bands of colour in the lower section of the work can be seen as alluding to the contemporary hard edge abstract painting of such artists as Albers, Kelly and Noland.
Gallery label, July 2004
Lewis became known as an acerbic writer as well as a painter. Edith Sitwell was a poet and, with her brothers Osbert and Sacheverell, part of a cultural elite. Although Lewis had been close to them in the early 1920s, he heavily satirised them in The Apes of God 1930 as the epitome of cultural decline and vulgarity. The early sittings for this portrait were fraught with problems, such as Lewiss alarming behaviour, and in the end Sitwell refused to sit any more. He shows her as a beautifully painted doll, deprived of the slender hands of which she was so proud.
Sickert loved the theatre and became a friend of the actress Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies after writing her a fan letter in 1932. This painting shows her in the role of Queen Isabella of France in Christopher Marlowes 16th-century play Edward II. The name La Louve means she-wolf, a hostile title given to the historical Isabella. The production had taken place nine years earlier, and Sickert painted this picture from a small photograph, taken by Bertram Park, of the actress on stage. The painting was an immediate success and the Daily Mail described it as Mr Sickerts Best Work.
Broodthaers was a Belgian poet and artist who had a lifelong fascination with the work of the Belgian Surrealist, Ren Magritte. He was particularly interested in those works where Magritte introduced written words to contradict a visual image, and made a number of paintings and prints based on this idea. Such works question the relationship between art and the reality it depicts. This is one of a large series of works each consisting of nine panels and referring to various areas of culture. Here sixteen words refer to traditional paintings, listing for example, 'style', 'subject', 'colour' in French. The way the words are combined in each canvas represents a different painting.
The title Natural History was adopted by Twombly from an early scientific encyclopedia by the Roman Pliny the Elder. Natural History Part I (Mushrooms) was the first of two portfolios; the other was subtitled Some Trees of Italy. Twombly used a quasi-scientific presentation of different lithographic images, combining them with collaged sheets of paper and photographs. These are enhanced with drawings in the artists characteristic expressive graphic language.
Man Ray made the original version of this work immediately before he left New York to join the Paris Dada group. It consisted of an olive jar in which the olives had been replaced by ball bearings. The jar was labelled New York perhaps because the upright shape evoked a miniature skyscraper. Man Ray took the object with him to France, where he explained to a customs officer that it would give him the illusion of having something to eat, should he meet with hard times.
'We are driven by everything that is slightly taboo, by the forbidden'. In this work, Gilbert and George have discarded their trademark suits and instead appear naked. Sexuality is a central theme of their art, explored in images that are often provocative and disconcerting.
Augustus John, the most highly-regarded British artist of his day, painted this jaunty portrait of his second partner, Dorelia McNeill, for the annual exhibition, Fair Women organised by the International Society. These exhibitions included old masters as well as modern portraits, and reviewers comparedJohns picture to works by van Dyck and Manet. McNeill designed her own dress with high waist and long skirt and set a fashion for bohemian costume. This portrait was the first purchase by the Contemporary Art Society, although it was not allocated to Tate until 1917. Roger Fry dubbed it a gypsy Gioconda, mixing together McNeills Romany costume with the Mona Lisa.
Etty specialised in painting the nude and continued to attend life classes at the Royal Academy throughout his life. The presence of an older man working away studiously alongside much younger students caused some amusement among his contemporaries. Ettys modern reputation has rested on the apparent realism and erotic charge of his painted studies, which seem forward-looking, but the artist considered that he was working in a well-established tradition of high-minded painting.
Although his family were German-Flemish refugees, Johnson himself was born in London. The careful observation and refined handling of his portraits suggest that he may have trained  at least in part  in Holland. This is one of his earliest works.The sitter was the only daughter of Sir Alexander Temple of Etchingham, Sussex. The martlet (a heraldic bird) in her ear-ring is part of the Temple family arms. Susannas first husband, Sir Gifford Thornhurst, was to die in 1627. In 1636 she married Sir Martin Lister of Thorpe Arnold, Leicestershire.
This is one of three known studies that Nicholson  made as designs for a ballet to be produced by  Leonide Massine, the Russian choreographer.  Nicholson first met Massine in London in 1927 and  had attended the productions of the Russian  Ballet. Massine asked Nicholson to design a ballet  for him in the summer of 1934, and Nicholson  produced four small white reliefs as  designs for backdrops and an abstract drop  curtain. This is one of those reliefs. He made  them on a small scale so that he could send them  to Massine in Paris by post. Massine ultimately  rejected the designs and used the French artist  Christian Brard instead.
'Incubus' is one of a series of paintings which  Hume based on swing doors found in schools and  hospitals. These paintings are largely  monochromatic. Painted in pale-coloured household  gloss, they incorporate circles, squares and  rectangles to represent the windows and panels of  actual doors. They appear abstract, and yet they  accurately represent real doors. Hume used  housepaint to make the connection even more  literal. He also liked the reflective surface the  paint gave the works: '..it reflects the  environment which the works are shown in..  everything would be reflected within the painting,  including yourself...So they made you think about  light and about where the paintings begin and  end.'
Barns-Graham lived in St Ives and her art combined natural subjects with the influence of older abstract artists Ben Nicholson and Naum Gabo. This is one of several works painted following a visit to the Grindelwald Glacier in Switzerland in 1948 where she had direct experience of the monumental shape of the glacier, its light, and the contrast between solidity and glass-like transparency. This led her to attempt to combine multiple views from above, through and all round, as a bird flies, a total experience.
In this work, geometric figures in subdued colours are suspended in a dark, abstract background. The subtle use of texture and treatment of the surface adds a three-dimensional aspect to the painting. The forms are deliberately asymmetrical and hand-drawn, exemplifying the subtle subversion of European geometric abstraction in Brazilian art through the introduction of organic or destabilising elements. Schendel contributed to the development of Concrete and Neo-concrete art in Brazil during the 1960s, though she remained detached from those groups and developed a distinct and unique body of work.
George Bond, father of the seven children depicted in this portrait, was a wealthy city merchant, and an official in the East India Company. The family seems to have occupied several imposing residences, including a country house, Ditchleys in Essex, and a Jacobean mansion in Wimbledon.In the foreground, the three older boys play cricket, flanked by their two sisters. Their two younger brothers are dressed in white frocks, as was then the custom for toddlers of either sex. The youngest boy, Essex Henry Bond, second from the left, later made his career as a commander in the navy, transporting convicts to Australia.
In this series of photographs, Sherman takes the guise of a model just after she has been photographed for a centrefold, concealing her naked body behind a pink bath robe. Stripped of the theatricality of the Film Stills, these images seem more emotionally and psychologically charged. Shot from close up with only subtle changes to the lighting, the photographs suggest a series of complex emotions in the subject. Her sometimes vulnerable, sometimes confrontational gaze suggests exploitation rather than glamour.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
Gallery label, September 2004
Massons placement of the musical instruments, and the rhyming of straight and curved lines, allude to the pre-war Cubist painting of Picasso and Braque. The flowers and dead bird could be seen as evoking life and death in somewhat conventional terms. However, the red pomegranate halves express a more bloody and violent vision. The fruits seeds may symbolise the force of life and regeneration, but the red interior also suggests viscera. Masson associated the pomegranate with his memory of the injured skull of a soldier in the First World War.
The subject of this painting is Juliet Yardley Mills (JYM), Auerbach's principal model since 1963. Auerbach has completed over seventy portraits
This painting of a huge snake about to attack a white horse was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1833. In the past, the painting was thought to show Napoleons Arab charger, Marengo  hence the title Marengo and the Serpent on the frame. However, it is more likely to show George IIIs horse, Adonis. Although he specialised in painting animals, Ward consistently used allegory in his paintings, so this work may be intended to show the power of the monarchy (the horse) being threatened by the government (the serpent) as it prepared to widen the franchise by passing the Great Reform Bill in 1832.
Sargent made this portrait at Broadway in the Cotswolds at the time he was working on 'Carnation, Lily, Lily, Rose', which shows Mrs Barnard's daughters Polly and Dorothy. The lighting in both paintings is artificial, and they were posed in the evening.
Gallery label, February 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
Cunt Scum belongs to a series of 26 works known as The Dirty Words Pictures, based around images of graffiti found and photographed by the artists. Most of the photographs were taken around Spitalfields 
in east London, where the artists live. Traditionally home to London's immigrant communities, the area was targeted for attack in the mid-1970s by the white nationalist organisation the National Front. The noisy demonstrations and acts of violence organised by the National Front contributed significantly to the racial tensions which were acutely felt in Britain and particularly London during this time.
In 1914 Wyndham Lewis and the American poet and critic Ezra Pound together promoted Vorticism, an avant-garde movement celebrating the machine age and the artist as a mystic, inventor, and organiser of forms. Both men were controversial writers. Their relationship was at times difficult: in the 1920s Lewis had been very critical of Pound's poetry. But Lewis set aside their differences to produce this tribute to his friend. It is one of a series of portraits Lewis began in 1938, which also included T.S. Eliot and Stephen Spender. The composition is dominated by the diagonal lines of Pound's reclining body and the newspapers, which are offset by the strong verticals on the left.
These pages occurred towards the middle of the  dismembered sketchbook partially reconstituted in  this display. Three sheets have been included  from private collections to which they were  dispersed prior to the Tate Gallery's acquisition  of the remainder.Bacon's known interest in boxing seems to be  reflected in several drawings, echoing those  earlier in the sketchbook. The figures are  speedily sketched. By making the trappings  ambiguous - lines may be ropes or outlines of  furniture - a sense of drama enlivens Bacon's  habitual reclining figures. This process also  resulted in the hovering pose of 'Figure  Crawling', which is based on the upper figure from  Muybridge's famous photograph of a pair of  wrestlers.
This is possibly Gainsboroughs most important portrait
The title is a musical term describing a regular metric and harmonic theme upon which variations of melody and rhythm, voices or instruments are based. Here the proportions and positions of the colours - the blacks, whites and even the greys - are repeated in the same order throughout. Only the greys vary in moving from a light tone, close to the colour bands on both sides, to a deeper, nearly black shade just off-centre. This subtle movement and the displacement of balance  give a surprising sense of depth to an otherwise flat space.
Lanyon was born in St Ives and returned to Cornwall after serving with the Royal Air Force during the Second World War.  Headland  the dramatic convergence of cliffs and sea  reflects Lanyons early interest in the ambiguous spaces and edges in nature, the intersections of core and surface, land and water. Like Ivon Hitchens, with whom he corresponded during the 1950s and 1960s, Lanyon looked at landscape from multiple perspectives, recording his bodily experience of places from above, behind and below. Naum Gabos constructions were also important models for his working practice, which he referred to as immersion in landscape.
Throughout his career Kossoff has made portrait drawings. Usually these are of family, friends or, as in this case, himself. Kossoff was a student of David Bomberg (whose work is also on show here). Bomberg maintained that there could be no good painting without drawing. In common with Bomberg, drawing is a crucial activity for Kossoff and he draws constantly from the landscape and the figure. Here, the heavily worked surface has been repeatedly erased and re-drawn. This records the artist's many previous attempts to give form to a final definitive image, which is usually executed in one session. The portrait is thus spontaneous, but also founded on accumulated experience of the subject.
Braque used traditional artists props such as guitars, jugs and glasses to experiment with composition. The familiar objects in Guitar and Jug are presented in sombre colouring but with fluid lines, their softness set against a rigorous structure. The objects may also be interpreted as having symbolic associations, so that the guitar may allude to artistic harmony and the apples, branch and glass may celebrate the abundance of nature.
Guston had included sinister images of the Ku Klux Klan in his early murals, one of which was shot at and destroyed by Klan supporters when first shown. In the 1960s he returned to figurative painting and reintroduced the hooded Klansmen to his work. Guston meant his paintings to be interpreted in the light of the political violence of the decade, but he also saw the Klan paintings as ironic self-portraits: 'The idea of evil fascinated meI almost tried to imagine that I was living with the Klan. What would it be like to be evil? To plan, to plot.'
This word poem is a commentary on paintings by the artist David Novros. Each block includes the same words, but in the lower half, the sequence  is reversed. Letters written vertically in the upper section appear horizontally in the lower section, and vice versa. This structure echoes Novros's preoccupation with interlocking canvases.
Porthmeor is a beach close to Hepworths studio in St Ives, Cornwall. A critic thought this sculpture seems to belong to the living world of the sea. The curling top lip of the bronze is like a representation of a breaking wave while the green and white patina of the inner surface recalls the colour of the sea and surf. At Porthmeor, Hepworth observed the changing tide, the movement of sand and wind, and the footprints of people and birds. For her, the rhythm of the tides was part of a natural order to which humankind also belongs.
After moving from Buenos Aires to Paris at the end of 1958, Le Parc began to paint pictures with simple geometrical forms because he considered them more neutral than irregular forms, therefore closer to his aim of removing all trace of the artists touch and of subjective points of view. He soon started experimenting with movement and chance by suspending plastic or metal shapes on thin nylon threads in front of a contrasting background. Le Parc was a founding member of GRAV, the Groupe de Recherche dArt Visuel (Visual art research group) in 1960.
Like several of the Surrealists, with whom he exhibited in 1925, Pierre Roy used a precise style to portray an uncertain reality. A Naturalists Study alludes to the nineteenth-century concern with scientific classification and order. However, the relationship between these curious objects, including a paper snake and a string of eggs, remains mysterious. The artists son described this work as portraying a strangely motionless world: Life seems to have stopped and become fixed like the locomotive itself in front of a chance or imaginary obstacle.
Inspired by food, clothing and household appliances, Oldenburg's sculptures introduce surprising modifications in terms of scale, materials and texture. His aim is 'to get people accustomed to recognising the power of objects'. This sculpture represents the counter of a bar with a sandwich, French bread, potato and slices of ham. Oldenburg's sensuous use of colour and texture echoes the surfaces of abstract paintings of the period.
Hepworth was one of a number of sculptors who returned to the handcraft of carving. The resulting immediacy of the artists relationship to her material was crucial. She described her process as an effort to find a personal accord with the stones...I was fascinated by the kind of form that grew out of each sculpture, and by the kind of form that grew out of achieving a personal harmony with the material.Like others, she sourced a wide range of indigenous British stones. This figure is made of Corsehill stone, a red sandstone quarried in Dumfriesshire.
In Greek myth Pandora was the first mortal woman. The gods gave her gifts of beauty, the power of song and eloquence. Zeus gave her a box containing every human ill and sent her to Earth. When she opened this box, all the misfortunes that afflicted mankind flew out. Bates shows the moment of hesitation before Pandora opens the forbidden box. He suggests Pandora's mood of consideration and temptation while also recognising the inevitable fulfilment of the myth. This way he acknowledges the compulsion of character, and frailty of the human spirit. The ivory box is carved with figures relating to the creation of Pandora.
This tapestry was woven from a collage by Paolozzi, an artist who worked across sculpture, print-making and film, incorporating imagery from popular culture and forms from industrial machinery.
This small sculpture is part of a series in which the female nude is treated with increasing abstraction. The reclining figure takes up the languid pose of the odalisque, a traditional view of the female nude, which Matisse regularly used in his paintings and drawings. A balance is struck between the sensual, relaxed curves and the robust form of the supporting arm and shoulder.
Gallery label, September 2004
This is one of four murals commissioned in 1909 to decorate the hall of the house in Chelsea of Hugh Lane, a private dealer in old master paintings. John designed the composition using his own family and friends as models, including at the right his wife Ida, who had recently died. It was painted from a full size drawing. John then painted out a figure at the centre, and suggested alterations to compensate. Hugh Lane died in 1915, and his paintings were never finished.Lyric Fantasy was not displayed, nor given its title, until 1940. John devoted his early career to these decorative murals, which he based on drawings and colour sketches.
This is portraiture at one remove: a painting of an imagined carved likeness. In it Pierre Roy turns his friend and fellow-artist, the mosaicist Boris Anrep, to stone. Through a characteristic manipulation of perspective, Roy manages to convey a sense of monumentality to the bust, which appears to tower over the studio behind. Though the painted sculpture is solemn and restrained, Roys perspective creates an odd effect like a cinematic zoom in which an object is suddenly brought into dramatic focus.
Wine-Crucifix was originally painted as an altar-piece for the Student Chapel of the Catholic University in Graz, Austria. It hung loosely, without a frame, across a large window. Light shining through the cloth would reveal the shape of a cross beneath layers of paint. The title of the work evokes the transformation of wine into the blood of Christ. After the work was removed from its religious setting in the mid-1960s, the artist bought it back and in 1978 decided to rework it. I realised that the quality and truth of the picture only grew as it became darker and darker, Rainer has explained.
The 1980s saw massive protests by the women's movement in India against the murder of brides unable to meet extortionate marital demands for consumer goods or cash: a contemporary corruption of traditional gift-giving. Both activist and photographer, Chhachhi chronicled the resistance to violence against women for over a decade. In 1990 she re-examined documentary practice and the power dynamics involved in her representation of the women involved. She developed individual staged portraits with seven protagonists of the earlier archive, asking each to decide how they wanted to be portrayed. Chhachhi calls this 'an invitation to perform the self'. The dream in the title refers to their collective struggle for emancipation.
In the 1890s Sickert spent most of his summers at the French port of Dieppe, and from 1896 to 1905 he lived there permanently. At that time it was popular with British artists as well as being a fashionable holiday resort for English people as indicated by a barbers sign in English on the right. The Caf des Tribunaux was at a focal point of the town, where two roads converge, and was frequented by British visitors. Both French realist and Impressionist tendencies are present in the painting.
In his work, Salle highlights the range and  availability of images encountered in a  technological, mass media age. He demonstrates  that whilst we are bombarded with information, its  meaning or significance is often lost. Like many  of his paintings, this work includes direct  quotations from works of art. It is his use of  images from pornographic publications, however,  that has been most provocative. Salle has  explained that 'the point about the poses in my  work is that they are the body in extremes often  seen from strange points of view and spatial  organization. It has more to do with abstract  choreography and angles of vision than with  pornographic narrative'. 'Satori' is a Japanese  term meaning 'sudden enlightenment'.
This is one of four paintings Turner exhibited in 1845 and 1846 exploring the activities of whaling fleets. He seems to have hoped that his patron Elhanan Bicknell, who was himself involved in this business, would buy the series, but he ultimately only acquired one of the canvases. The whale here is in the process of being caught. Another picture in this series shows the whale being cut up for its blubber. Turner seems to have borrowed the name of this whaling ship from HMS Erebus, which with her companion vessel, the Terror, had discovered Anarctica during explorations of the South Seas in 1839-43.
Moore drew inspiration from many sources, including natural forms and ancient sculptures, as well as responding to the challenge of his contemporaries. Both suggestively organic and abstract, Composition is a striking example of his radical inventiveness, confirming how his work came to epitomise modern art in Britain in the 1930s. He argued that surrealism and abstraction were not incompatible, and wrote of the importance of the nonlogical, instinctive, subconscious part of the mind in his artistic process.
Gallery label, June 2003
Joan Eardley studied at Glasgow School of Art and  lived in the city from 1940 to 1961. In 1950 she  discovered the small fishing village of Catterline  on the east coast of Scotland, and was captivated  by the place. She rented cottages there from 1950  to 1961, when Catterline became her permanent  home. Fishermen caught crabs and lobster in summer  and cod and haddock in winter. There was also a  salmon season from February to August when these  fish were caught in bag nets. The nets were  stretched out to dry on the grass above the high  water line of the Catterline shore and Eardley  painted them on the spot.
The individual titles of this series of paintings list the separate pigments used to make them. The paint layers can be seen at the edges. The artist says that these edges can be read ''almost like a bar code'', making it possible to ''uncover the history of each painting''. They come from a group of fifty such works, which trace the history of painting by classifying and indexing the development of artist''s pigments, from early cave paintings to the present day. The information is taken from a chart produced by the paint manufacturers Winsor & Newton.
The subject is taken from the Old Testament. Two community elders lust after the virtuous Jewish wife, Susanna. They hide in the garden where she bathes and threaten that, unless she sleeps with them, they will publicly accuse her of adultery. She rejects them, and they carry out their threat, but her innocence is proved by the prophet Daniel. Lely was born in Soest, Germany, though his family came from The Hague, in the Netherlands. After training in Haarlem, he arrived in England in the early 1640s. Lely was appointed Principal Painter to Charles II in 1660 and became the leading portrait painter in Britain.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
In the early 1880s Steer studied in Paris, where he encountered the work of the French impressionists. After his return to England in 1884, he painted a series of luminous and brightly coloured coastal views which relate to Monets paintings of the same period. The loose brushwork and sparkling colours brilliantly capture the transience and exhilaration of childhood and summer vacations. His use of strongly contrasting colours draws on theories being promoted by the most avant-garde painters in France at this time.
Made using plaster in the garden of a derelict house, Long has stated that this was his 'first  work actually digging into the ground. I wanted to make the work both below ground level and in the ground'. The work anticipates Long's physical engagement with landscape, yet its modest scale is consistent with his non-invasive approach. Although taken in 1965, these photographs were first displayed in 1983.
Lares is based on the shape of Nashs fireplace. To the Romans the Lares were protective deities, sometimes worshipped at the crossroads but particularly associated with the home and hearth. Nash brought a further intimacy to this reference by including the tools of his artistic activity (a T-square and a set-square). This mysterious juxtaposition may owe something to his admiration for the work of Giorgio de Chirico, who had his first London exhibition in late 1928. Nash's new work turned towards Surrealism in the following years.
Gegos work often relates to a tradition in modern art of using grids and geometric forms. The Reticularea series was based on the idea of the mesh or net. These wire sculptures were composed of repeated geometric forms that were articulated and thus flexible. This grid-like form is comprised of incomplete cubes and asymmetrical polygons and its flexibility allows for distortions. As a potentially infinitely expanding pattern it is also a potential environment for the body of the viewer.
De Kooning began making sculpture in 1969, having previously discarded the idea much earlier in his career. This sculpture is one of his largest and was modelled in clay. Because his hands were too small to work the clay in the way he wanted, he wore two oversize pairs of workman's gloves, thereby ending up with fingers five or six inches long. The increase in size of his hands allowed him to work more broadly than he would have otherwise been able. De Kooning's interest in the expressiveness of the material falls within the tradition of sculpture beginning with Rodin and taken up by Giacometti.
Gallery label, August 2004
Although this work was painted in Hamburg, it was probably inspired by the artists regular summer visits to Dangast on the North Sea coast. The dunes, grasslands and fishing villages of this area appear in a number of Schmidt-Rottluffs paintings. The mask-like faces of the two women may reflect Schmidt-Rottluffs familiarity with masks from Cameroon. The artists of the Brcke group drew inspiration from the African and South East Asian artefacts in the Dresden Ethnographic Museum, which they saw as embodying an unspoilt and more authentic culture.
Turner made extensive studies of shipwrecks in two sketchbooks of about 1805, and produced his first painting of the subject the same year. The theme recurred frequently in his work, including Disaster at Sea (about 1833), on display in Room 9.

The present picture shows a burning boat partially hidden by waves, which are the main subject. Like many of his later sea pieces, the view is from the shore, where a group of onlookers has gathered.

This work may be a companion to Yacht Approaching the Coast displayed nearby; perhaps pairing light and dark.
Henri Gaudier (who added Sophie Brzeskas name to his own) carved Seated Woman on the eve of the First World War, though this bronze version was cast long after his death in the trenches. It shows his commitment to a dynamic modernism that made him a key figure in Vorticism in London. The reinvention and simplification of form reflect Gaudiers view of the modern sculptor: what he feels, he does so intensely, and his work is nothing more nor less than the abstraction of this intense feeling.
The title of this painting refers to the date of its completion. Soulages began experimenting with abstraction in 1947, using heavy brushstrokes of black paint against a light background. This calligraphic style was to become increasingly vigorous and gestural throughout the 1950s. Soulages has said that for him abstraction is a means of exploring his imagination and inner experience. In 1950 he explained: 'I work, guided by inner impulse, a longing for certain forms, colours and materials, and it is not until they are on the canvas that they tell me what I want'.
This is one of a series of paintings by Redon  which combine flowers and a female head. For Redon  this motif was expressive of a harmony or  correspondence between nature and the human soul.  Here the subdued colours emphasise the ethereal  quality of the image. The woman's head is drawn in  a simple, almost archaic style, and is likely to  have been inspired by early Italian Renaissance portraits.
Gallery label, September 2004
In the summer of 1988 Cragg completed thirty five etchings, including the five shown here. Four are from the 'Laboratory Still Life' series, in which Cragg's subject is still lifes of glass laboratory equipment. 'Six Bottles Large, State 1' belongs to another series in which Cragg depicts plastic bleach and dishwashing bottles, their pitted surfaces suggesting that decay affects man-made as well as natural objects. Both types of object evoke interference with nature. This is a central theme in his work because, as Cragg has stated, 'the quality and and nature of our environment ... is actually having a very direct effect on us, on our sensibilities, perhaps even our emotions and intellects'.
This is one of several scenes Branson painted while living in Battersea during the Second World War. The juxaposition of scales and perspectives in this painting blend surrealism and modern realism to create a striking visual intensity. The contrasting details, such as the local British-Nazi propaganda graffiti beneath a government sponsored Dig for Victory poster, convey conflicting ideologies in British society of which he would have been conscious as a member of the Communist Party. Branson later joined the Royal Armoured Corps and died on active service in Burma in 1944.
Lewis was one of the first black artists to work with abstraction in America. Cathedral comes from a group of works inspired by the dense urban landscape visible from Lewiss studio in Harlem, New York. In this series, abstraction and visual references to the real world are blurred. Following the Second World War his work became increasingly abstract. This was partly in response to his disillusionment with the United States. He saw the master race ideology of Nazi Germany echoed in the segregation of the US armed forces.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include artists, gallerists and cultural institutions. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality.  These posters were fly-posted overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use pseudonyms. They continue to produce publicity exposing discrimination, as well as conducting seminars and workshops in schools, colleges and art institutions.
Masson made a series of paintings of Spanish landscapes from 1934 to 1936, when he was living in Catalonia, including this one of Ibdes, a village in Aragon. In these completely recognisable landscapes there is always an element of fantasy, either in the sky, or on the ground, or underground, he wrote. Here, Surrealist double-images are provided by the cocks woven into the landscape and the crocodile formed by the rocks in the background.
Baselitz emphasises the very physical nature of making his large format prints, seeing the process of cutting into the surface of lino or wood as an act of the body rather than the mind. This female nude is a portrait of Baselitzs wife, Elke. Baselitz began by rapidly drawing the outlines of the figure directly onto a sheet of linoleum, then cutting into it, adding dense networks of lines. After working on the print for two days in February 1977 he put it aside, then returned to it and completed it in May 1979.
Coldstream wanted to develop an objective manner of painting, transcribing onto canvas precisely what he saw before him. This supposed objectivity was most clearly shown by his technique of measuring the distances between different points on the body and marking them on the canvas with red paint.  But these marks may also function as active parts of the image. For example, the clusters around the models nipples seem to inject an erotic undertone.Coldstreams desire for precision and objectivity meant that he rarely decided a painting was finished, but simply stopped when he reached a deadline.
Lucy is part of a series of works by Dumas in which figures lie supine, either asleep or dead, with their eyes closed and mouth open in a pose that recalls depictions of sexual consummation. Each one is drawn from a found image. Lucy is based on a detail from Caravaggios 1608 painting The Burial of St Lucy, which Dumas has reworked in a style that suggests the flatness of a morgue photograph. According to legend, the saint was brutally tortured, blinded, and finally stabbed in the throat.
This is a personal graphic visual presentation of the history, influence and context for acid house and brass band music; its flow diagram indicates possible social and political echoes between the two forms. The print also provides the graphic rationale for Acid Brass, a project initiated by Jeremy Deller in 1996 for which acid house music was arranged and performed by brass bands. The joining of acid house and brass band music illustrated the historical breadth of the spirit of dissent that characterised opposition to the Thatcherite break-up both of the coal industry and Britains wider industrial and manufacturing base.
Duncan Grant was a leading figure in the Bloomsbury Group.  In 1909 he visited the Paris studio of Matisse, whose Dancers may have partly inspired this painting.

The vibrant colours and dynamic forms also reflect the influence of Gauguin, Czanne and van Gogh.  These were the chief artists introduced to British audiences through Roger Frys Manet and the Post-Impressionists exhibition, which was held at the Grafton Galleries in London between 1910 and 1911.
Gallery label, September 2004
The objects on the mantelpiece shown in this painting include handmade paper flowers from the Omega workshops and, on the right, an Omega box by Frederick Etchells with swimmers on its sides.

This painting, and the one by Vanessa Bell depicting the same subject which hangs nearby, demonstrate the differences in approach of the two artists.  Grants work is notable for the use of cut and coloured paper collaged to the surface of the painting
Prendergast was brought up near Caerphilly in South Wales where his father was a miner. Following his studies at Cardiff College of Art and the Slade School he moved to Bethesda in Gwynedd and there became fascinated by the nearby slate quarry and, in particular, the view into its pit from the edge of the man-made cliff. The artist wrote of this painting: I first saw the quarry seventeen years ago in 1970. It impressed me because of its scale, ... from the bottom of the pit [it] looked like Breughel's Tower of Babel in reverse.
'Salta nel mio Sacco' is from a series of metal reliefs entitled 'Cones and Pillars' which Stella  created in the mid 1980s. The individual reliefs  were given titles from Italo Calvino's book of  'Italian Folktales'. Stella has commented that  'they have very much the spirit of the well-told  folktale. They are very active, they're very  fantasy-like, and they are very simple  even  brutal  in the way that fairy tales are...I had  the feeling that with a little bit of mental  jockeying their forms could represent things. It  wasn't hard to imagine them being a cat or a  person'. The title, from a tale of the same name,  means 'Jump into my Sack'.
Like 'Gift' (also in this room), 'Drought' belongs to the series of target paintings which Noland executed between 1958 and 1962. 'Drought' is a later work than 'Gift'. Its narrower bands of colour make it less target-like, and they emphasise the effect of rotation which Noland was seeking. This effect is enhanced further by the introduction of irregular staining at the edge of the outer ring. Previously, Abstract Expressionist painters such as de Kooning and Rothko had been seeking to express intensity of feeling in their paintings. In creating an illusion of rotation, 'Drought' demonstrates that the intensity sought by Noland was visual rather than emotive.
Traditionally, this has been seen as a portrait of Woods friends Ben and Winifred Nicholson with their first child. They are shown against the backdrop of the harbour of St. Ives, then a fishing village and an established artists colony. It was painted the year in which Wood and Ben first met Alfred Wallis, the untutored painter whose instinctive style endorsed their own consciously nave mode of painting. To cast Nicholson in the role of fisherman was to invest him with the sort of rooted authenticity to which they aspired in their painting.
Hylda was the third daughter of the wealthy art dealer Asher Wertheimer, who had commissioned Sargent to paint twelve portraits of his family. Sargent''s reputation ensured that such portraits were a token of wealth and social standing. The portrait of Hylda is in the grand manner of the old masters, and great care is given to the depiction of the different luxurious textures of her clothing. Sargent tried to dissuade Hylda from wearing her pince-nez, which undermine this illusion, but they were retained at her insistence.
Elizabeth Cornwallis (1546/71628) married Sir Thomas Kytson in 1560 (his portrait hangs nearby). As Roman Catholics under a Protestant ruler, Elizabeth I, the Kytsons were regularly fined. Indeed, Lady Kytson was briefly imprisoned for her faith. The couple were painted in London in 1573 by Gower, the foremost portraitist of the day. Subsequently, in 1584, Gower and the miniaturist Nicholas Hilliard tried to gain a monopoly to produce Elizabeth Is portraits. As this painting demonstrates, Gower worked in the linear, shadowless style that the queen is known to have preferred.
This print was a digital collage, made by layering several images. It depicts a passageway with the lower panel of the Large Glass superimposed as if it was hanging on the wall. The young woman was originally photographed reading by the window. As Hamilton explains, I flipped and laterally reversed her. It is not a reflection, she is ghosted (maybe 70% transparent) into the glass. The phrase mirrorical return derives from Duchamps notes in the Green Box, describing elements that were to have travelled mirrorically from one part of the composition to another. It relates to Duchamps interest in the fourth dimension.
Gallery label, September 2004
After fighting in the First World War, Jones went to art school in 1918. Long enthusiastic about Blake, in 1943 Jones saw Blake's  Body of Abel, shown in this display, much enlarged at a lantern slide lecture. His awareness of Blake's 'overwhelmimg' qualities grew. As a watercolourist, engraver and poet, Jones has obvious affinities with Blake. Aphrodite was drawn during the Second World War. Its Classical and Christian allusions are comparable  with Blake's use of art when commenting  on contemporary events. The Greek goddess of love and fertility, chained  to an altar, is flanked by a British and  German soldier.
Turner apparently bought works by Reynolds  or from his studio at the sale of the painter's  niece, the Marchioness of Thomond, in 1821.  One of these, possibly this unfinished sketch,  was hung in his hall at Queen Anne Street although it was not listed in the 1854 inventory.  The hall was described at the end of his life  as being bare, with 'dingy brown' walls,  but the inventory hints at a more considered arrangement, including Turner's four casts  of Centaur and Lapith metopes from the  Elgin Marbles, a pair of painted pedestals with marble tops and a plaster cast on the stairs.
Rye, a picturesque town near the south coast,  was Burra's life-long home. During the war it became a centre for military activity. Soldiers  are turned into nightmarish birdmen that recall  the Surrealist paintings of the German artist  Max Ernst and Burra's own work of the early Thirties. The artist was interested in sixteenth-century English poetry, and the bright colours and stylised dress might suggest courtly combat. Such ideas  of brutality and heroism are offset by the attention to the figures' buttocks that creates a homosexual  frisson through the scene.
Stephen Willats is interested in the ways in which people construct their world in relation to the social or physical constraints that are  put upon them. In this work, Stephen Willats explores the realities of living in a tower block, investigating how buildings can stand as symbols for our culture. Over six months Willats photographed and interviewed Mrs Moran, an elderly lady who was living alone in the tower block. By giving the viewer an insight into the isolation of living in a tower block, the artist hopes they will look at and understand their own cultural situation.
Dalwood depicts the imagined bedroom of film-maker and philosopher Guy Debord, the leading figure in the Situationist International, a radical movement formed in Paris in 1957. The scribbles on the walls allude to Debords call for mass vandalism, but are in fact copies of paintings by Cy Twombly - an artist whose works now sell for millions - perhaps Dalwoods sly reference to the commodity fetishism of painting. Freedom here may refer to political liberties called for by artists and students in the demonstrations of 1968 or the perhaps more illusory freedom of choice held up by contemporary consumerist culture.
The dynamism of Bacon's studies of the body is  evident in 'Turning Figure'. Preliminary pencil  sketching was obliterated by energetic pink and  green paint, with the precariousness of the body  anchored by the stable green frame. In general  terms, the sketch relates to a number of 1962 oil  paintings (from which the title has been  borrowed). The complications of the poses were  associated by John Russell with Bacon's  observation that 'Painting makes me more aware of  behaviour'.Bacon gave this work to the poet Stephen Spender,  who wrote a number of articles on him around 1961.  It was accompanied by 'Figure in a Landscape' and  the pair of 'Reclining Figures', also in this  display.
Blake was one of the leaders of British Pop Art, a movement which celebrated contemporary popular culture. This is one of a series of collages he made during the 1960s with pin-up photos, posters and other ephemeral images. Blake has long been a fan of wrestling and had been to watch an American wrestler called the Masked Zebra Kid fight several times. The autograph of the wrestler in the centre of the painting is surrounded by photographs taken from a fan magazine.
This sculpture belongs to a group of oval  wood carvings dating from the mid-1940s. The  splits in the wood occurred while the work was in  progress, and so the artist abandoned it  unfinished. Nonetheless, the sculpture embodies a  strong empathy with the Cornish landscape which  inspired it, and with the material used: 'I  believe that the understanding of the material and  the meaning of the form being carved must be in  perfect equilibrium.' There is another, smaller  version, 'Tides II', which was executed in the  same year. This sculpture was presented to the  Tate Gallery by Ben Nicholson in the year of  Hepworth's death.
This painting illustrates a scene in the  Old Testament book Exodus. Moses was  called by God to Mount Sinai to receive the  Ten Commandments, written on two slabs  of stone. One Commandment was 'Thou shalt  have no other gods before me'. However,  in Moses's absence, the Israelites were  worshipping a statue of a golden calf. When  Moses saw this he broke the stone slabs in  fury. In Blake's own mythology, a character  named Urizen makes iron laws to repress Man. Blake links Urizen with God and Moses who  made the laws of organised religion, which  Blake wanted to see destroyed.
Hilton titled many of his paintings simply by the  date of their completion so as to emphasise his  desire that the work be seen for itself, and not  in any representational way. However, by the 1960s  he had developed a new kind of figurative  language. In his compositions of these years  abstract shapes and looping lines often suggest  the presence of a figure or landscape, or both.  These bold forms are obsessional, recurring  constantly in his paintings. Works of this  period, such as 'September 1961', are also less  densely painted and more atmospheric than earlier  works. This could well be the result of his  growing sensitivity to his light-filled, airy  surroundings.
This painting depicts a view of roofs and facades seen from the artists fourth-floor flat in Vienna, where she lived during the first half of the 1920s. The cupola in the upper centre of the painting is part of the Johann Strauss Theatre, famous for its performances of light opera. Technically this painting makes a shift in the artists work. Previously she had applied paint in dabs which created a mottled effect. This work is painted with rather freer brush strokes. The elongated vertical format is characteristic of von Motesiczkys canvases of the period.
Alfred Wallis was a seaman, ice cream seller and rag-and-bone man before he took up painting in old age. He said he painted what used to be and many of his works depict a remembered past.In 1928 he met professional artists Ben Nicholson and Christopher Wood, for whom Walliss work represented an instinctive and nave folk art. As such, Wallis seemed to belong to the tradition of rustic characters common in literature, and represented a link to an apparently timeless English culture.
Gallery label, August 2004
Constables mother, Ann Watts, was the daughter of a prosperous London cooper. She probably met her husband, Golding, on one of his visits to London to attend the corn market. She encouraged her son's artistic career, especially during his early years in London, and wrote to him regularly from Suffolk. This portrait probably dates from about 18005 when she was in her fifties. It is traditionally thought to have been painted by Constable himself. However, recent research suggests the artist may have been RR Reinagle.
Various breeds of cattle are presented in a  grid-like pattern resembling pages from an educational or scientific manual. However, the names printed beneath each cow are those  of car manufacturers. As a young man, Broodthaers befriended the Surrealist painter Ren Magritte. One of Magritte's most famous paintings featured a picture of a pipe with the words 'This is not a pipe' written in French underneath. Broodthaers was fascinated by the way Magritte used words to contradict a visual image. Here he plays his own game, pitting visual and linguistic meanings against each another.
Flanagan experimented with non-conventional materials, which he considered the most important element in sculpture. Having selected the materials for a given work, he would then remove himself from the process, witnessing the effects of physics on the materials themselves. This is one of a large number of works he made in 1969 in which flax and branches are used. These were often leant against walls or propped in corners, playing with the boundaries between two and three dimensions.
Pincushion to Serve as Fetish was described by Tanning as not an image, but bristling with images. It resembles a small animal, but the white lines on the black velvet, together with the pins pushed into it, also hint at the operations of magic or ritual. Tanning wrote: A fetish is something not exactly or always desirable in sculpture, being a superstitious if not actually shamanistic object; and yet, to my mind its not so far from a pincushion  after all, pins are routinely stuck in both.
This painting shows an episode from the Spanish conquest of Peru in 1632. The Inca king, Atalhuellpa, is questioning Christian beliefs in front of the chaplain of the Spanish conquistador, Francisco Pizarro. A struggle ensued during which the king was captured and many Incas were slaughtered.
Gabo used this work to illustrate his essay Sculpture: Carving and Construction in Space in the anthology Circle. The two cubes show two ways of defining space in sculpture  one uses solid mass while the other expresses the forms inner space. The latter was the key concept behind Gabos constructions; he sought to make the space occupied by an object visible without enclosing it.  Inner space was an example of what Gabo called the Constructive idea, where the boundaries between the object and the artists perceptions of that object were dissolved, so that art becomes reality.
Gallery label, September 2004
Dunbar's parents lived at Strood near Rochester in Kent and this picture is a record of their garden. Between 1929 and 1933 the artist attended Rochester Art School, Chelsea School of Art and the Royal College of Art in London and remembered that this painting was begun before arriving in London as an art student and finished off around 1937. In that same year Dunbar wrote and illustrated the book 'Gardeners' Choice', along with the painter Charles Mahoney, who had been her teacher at the Royal College. Dunbar also executed murals at Brockley School, near Lewisham in the mid 1930s and was an Official War Artist during the Second World War.This painting was chosen by Eleanor Bron.
Insects and fossils merge in Sutherlands Head III. The painter would later insist that these hybrid creatures were not intended to be threatening. At the time, however, the critic Herbert Read identified in Sutherlands work the now prevailing cosmic anxiety.
In the mid-1970s, Finn-Kelcey started staging performances. This photograph was inspired by a snapshot of the artists mother. Finn-Kelcey revisited a beach near Dungeness, Kent, where her family had gone when she was a child, and took a series of photographs of herself performing handstands. The image appears to capture an exuberant, impulsive gesture but the works subtitle suggests a divergence between the experience of the subject and what is visible to the spectator. The artist continued to explore the inconsistency between internal experience and external observation in the 1970s.
Gallery label, September 2004
In 1947-48 Nolan executed a series of paintings inspired by the story of Eliza Fraser. He returned to the theme in 1957, completing 31 paintings including this work and 'In the Cave' (also shown in this room). In the 1860s Eliza Fraser and her husband were shipwrecked on an island off the coast of Queensland. After her husband was murdered by aborigines, Mrs Fraser lived among them. They fed her but stripped her. She was rescued by an escaped convict, David Bracefell, who became her lover and whom Mrs Fraser eventually betrayed. This painting depicts Mrs Fraser in the tropical rain forest which she inhabited for months with Bracefell during their return to civilisation.
When he revisited the castle in 1831 Turner is reported to have said, 'I made a drawing or painting of Norham several years since. It took, and from that day to this I have had as much to do as my hands could execute.' In all his depictions the castle is seen at dawn, its dark form given emphasis by the rising sun beyond, an effect which must have been one of Turner's chief joys in repeating the subject so often. This watercolour was executed in the early 1820s for a group of views of the Rivers of England by which time he had already included a similar view in his Liber Studiorum.
Knights studied at the Slade School of Art and won several painting prizes while she was a student there. In 1920 she was awarded the British School at Rome Scholarship in Decorative Painting for her painting 'The Deluge', which is also on display in this gallery. She lived and worked at the British School at Rome from 1920 to late 1924 and painted some figure compositions and landscapes. This is a view of the river Tiber from the outskirts of Rome to the north. It was purchased from the artist the year after it was painted, when she was still only twenty-three.
Much of Bourgeois' work is autobiographical, and relates to her traumatic childhood. She idolised her mother, and loathed her overbearing, adulterous father. Bourgeois made her first prints in the 1940s and, after a gap of about forty years, returned to printmaking in 1990. Frequently child-like in style, these works portray the events and fantasies of her childhood and adolescence. The scenes include the trauma of birth, the pubescent discovery of the body, the moulding of a daughter by her mother, and the stifling of a daughter by her father.
'Black Relief' is constructed from squares and rectangles arranged in two rows on the upper and lower halves of a backing board. The uppermost surface of each block is finished in black perspex. The layers of the relief are painted in different colours, beginning with matt black, furthest from the spectator, followed by grey, ochre and red. The depth of the blocks varies, allowing some colours to remain visible as either surfaces or as the thickness of the relief. Apart from perspex Martin has used both the smooth and textured faces of hardboard to give variety to the surfaces. Both the colour and the layers, or folds, of the construction serve to emphasise movement within the spatial patterning of the work.
Bote Alerte was made as the deluxe catalogue for the EROS exhibition organised by Andr Breton and Marcel Duchamp in Paris in 1959. The title is a pun on bote  lettres (letter box) and the contents include letters, pictures and booklets by those involved in the exhibition. This collective work was conceived by the Canadian artist Mimi Parent who contributed an image of her object Masculin / Feminin. Among other items contained within the box are Duchamps imitation rectified readymades Couple of Laundress Aprons.
Gallery label, August 2004
Through this sculpture of a tortoise, Moore sought to express ideas about the relationship of abstract forms. He wrote about the idea behind the work as follows: It is one right-angled form, repeated five times, and arranged together to make an organic composition. This repeated slow right-angle reminded me of the action of a tortoise.
Kossoff developed a manner of painting with exceptionally thick paint which is deposited on the board in places almost untouched, giving a sense of three-dimensional form. The model for this painting was the painter John Lessore, who sat for Kossoff once or twice a week for three years. For most of that time, Kossoff recalled, he concentrated on developing the subject through drawings. The discipline of drawing every day is at the heart of Kossoffs practice.
Many of Horns performance instruments appear to simultaneously encase and expand the performers body. White Body Fan consists of two vast sails attached onto metal silhouettes of the artists legs and torso, with hinged bars that she can swing upwards with her arms. Using her body as pivot, these membranes extend into semi-circular shapes, measuring one and a half times her height. The gliding movements, at once choreographic and sculptural, remain however anchored to her standing position, suggesting an enclosed spherical space rather than the possibility of flight. Footage of the related performance is included in the film Performances II (as Krperfcher 1973).
Towards the end of his life Cox produced a number  of small pictures in which travellers are shown  crossing open landscapes in windy or stormy  weather. Some were based on earlier watercolours.  Birmingham City Art Gallery has a variant on this  work, 'The Cross Roads', in which three other  travellers are introduced ahead of the woman and  her dog.
Watts called these three paintings The Eve Trilogy. They represent Eves ascension to life, her temptation and her grief after her downfall. In her temptation she is shown greedily entwined with the apple tree. The dissolving forms of the central work correspond to the idea of Eve rising up in an explosion of light and colour. By contrast, the heaviness of flesh in the final work suggests her burden of sin and guilt.
This work was partly based on memories and sketches made by the artist on his 1842 tour of Europe and the Middle East. The open landscape is an unusual feature in the paintings Dadd made after his imprisonment and it is likely to have been based on views from the terrace at Broadmoor asylum. The figures of the musicians were probably drawn from inmates, while the instruments were observed from those owned by Dadd who was a passionate musician. The theme may derive from the Idylls of Theocritus, the Ancient Greek pastoral poet whose name appears on the broken frieze in the foreground.
Gallery label, September 2004
Carlines aesthetic derives from no established style.  The power of this portrait is symptomatic of modern psychology and the contemporary belief that the realisation of the individual was one of the chief signs of modernity. The directness of the artist's gaze here typifies the self-possession of the modern woman of the inter-war period.
Avis Newman has worked with a variety of grounds  and formats. But since 1982 she has chiefly been  associated with large mixed media drawings on  canvas. Until recently the canvases were usually  unstretched and pinned directly to the gallery  walls for display. Without rigid boundaries or  separations between them, elements could flow  between images. Recognisable elements in this work  include outlines of parts of the human body, bird  shapes and paleolithic symbols. This accumulation  of marks and traces has been described by the  artist as referring to the 'non existent,  phantisised body. Specifically the body of  sensations. A body of liquidity, touch,  temperature, memory'.
As part of the process of painting the view of Norham that he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1798 (no.41), Turner executed two large studies (nos.39 and 40), in which he set out the composition and experimented with alternative light effects. The backs of these sheets are prepared with washes of different pigments, and it seems that he was exploring the possibilities of achieving a suffused back lighting of the kind then popular in the fashion for transparencies.
Gallery label, September 2004
Bride is one of a series of pastels which Rego made in 1994 and which were shown that year under the title 'Dog Woman'. The pastels depicted women in dog-like positions, scavenging for food, baying at the moon, sleeping and grooming. Rego's daughter posed for this work wearing a 1950's raw silk wedding dress loaned by a friend. An early idea for 'Bride' had the model sitting on all fours, but Rego turned the figure so that she is 'belly-up in an attitude of surrender and ready to have her tummy tickled'. Rego has also noted that 'her hands and feet are uncovered, it was so vital that her extremities were exposed as they are in all animals'.
Tivoli is seen from across the gorge of the river Aniene (or 'Anio'), with the Roman 'Campagna' or plain and the city of Rome itself in the distance. To the left, on the cliff edge, is a small cluster of ancient buildings. These include the circular Roman Temple of Vesta, and the rectangular Temple of the Tiburtine Sibyl.
Guston was an important abstract expressionist painter in the 1950s, who controversially returned to figurative work in the late 1960s. His early abstract paintings were composed of shimmering combinations of short vertical and horizontal brushstrokes in pinks, reds and blues. Discussing The Return, Guston said that he saw the forms in the picture as being like figures who had been away for some time and who were now returning - jostling each other a little as they came.
Demolished captures the destruction of tower blocks in three different housing estates in Hackney, east London, between 1993 and 1995. According to Whiteread, this work is something that is going to be completely forgotten... the detritus of our culture. Whiteread was particularly concerned by the social and economic changes introduced by the Conservative party in the 1980s and their impact on homeless people in London. This work operates as a metaphor for neglect and disappearance, commemorating what no longer exists.
The bullfight was a subject Picasso returned to frequently, particularly after the mid-1950s. In this print, the
banderillero, whose task is to wound the bull by driving darts into its neck or shoulders, is transformed into a young woman. Her prey is an older man carrying a bull's head mask who kneels in front of her, as if in submission. The fight between man and bull becomes an ironic metaphor for the battle of the sexes at a time when Picasso was becoming particularly aware of his own ageing.
In his later years Turner spent much of his time at Margate with his companion, Mrs Booth. Here, he was able to study the coast at different times of day and in various weather conditions, responding with dozens of works in oil or watercolour in which  the sea itself was the main subject.

This picture looks across the sands to Margates harbour wall and lighthouse. The rough waves crash against the shore and create white plumes of spray depicted with thick impasto paint. Although the sky at the right is grey, above Margate it is golden and bright.
Mary Hunter (1856-1933) was a well known society hostess in London. She 

sat to Rodin at his house in Meudon 

near Paris. There are several casts of her portrait in bronze, but Rodin admired 

the 'marble' quality of her flesh, and 

made this more elaborate version in 

that material. He told her she was like 

'an Englishwoman of the time of Pericles' (that is, in the great period of Greek sculpture). The base of the sculpture is 

a cloudy, formless mound, decorated with a swag of roses, turning the head into 

a symbol of beauty, as well as a portrait.
This print is shows Clegyr Boia, the rocky  outcrop west of St David's, Pembrokeshire,  Wales. Sutherland visited the area each summer from 1934 to 1939. His pensive and atmospheric Welsh landscapes came to be seen as premonitions of war, expressive of the prevailing mood of anxiety and menace. Many critics identified him as a descendant of Blake; Graham Bell, for example, wrote:
The title Loreley refers to a mythical Rhine maiden, who lured sailors to their death. Kokoschka explained that his painting mocks British claims to maritime supremacy: Britannia no longer rules the waves; inaction has lasted too long; an octopus swims away with a trident, the emblem of marine power. Queen Victoria, who built up the British fleet into a dominant position, rides a shark and stuffs white, brown and black sailors into its mouth. Only the frog on her hand refuses to accept the same fate: it represents Ireland, where there are no reptiles except frogs.
In this work, Nicholson combines collage and painting to investigate different methods of pictorial representation. Sections of newspaper are used to 

represent a plate with two fish on the left, and a mug on the right. Another piece of newspaper, marked with the title Le Quotidien, appears to straightforwardly represent a newspaper on a table. More ambiguously, 

the paper doily may represent a second plate, or simply a paper doily. By creating these playful illusions, Nicholson presents everyday perception as fluid and uncertain.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include artists, gallerists and cultural institutions. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality.  These posters were fly-posted overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use pseudonyms. They continue to produce publicity exposing discrimination, as well as conducting seminars and workshops in schools, colleges and art institutions.
Leirners sculptures are often composed of found materials. Here, a number of spirit levels have been mounted onto the wall, in an arrangement whose industrial look and bright colours resembles a series of works by the American artist Donald Judd. Leirners use of familiar industrially produced objects reflects the desire (associated with many Latin American artists) to bring art closer to everyday life. Of her use of tools, Leirner has said: They carry with them the genius of the inventors, engineers, designers, the perfection of the industrial finish.
Peter Monamy was born in London, though his family were originally from the Channel Island of Guernsey and probably of Huguenot (French Protestant) ancestry. He was the first English-born marine painter of note, the genre having been brought to Britain by Dutch artists in the late 17th century. This scene of a storm at sea follows the Dutch tradition of such pictures. Although disaster seems inevitable, the clearing blue sky offers hope. It does not necessarily relate to an actual event, though for contemporary viewers it may have brought to mind the Great Storm of 1703 which wrecked many ships at sea.
Artschwagers sculptures are neither real, functional objects nor straightforward representations. They aim to call our attention to their nature as illusions. Artschwager has described them as useful furniture with an overlay of representation. This refers to his technique of applying the conventions used to depict form and space in illusionistic painting to three-dimensional objects. In this sculpture, the wood-grain and coloured plastic laminate are used to outline the forms of the table and chair and the empty areas around their legs or seat.
One of Heron's early non-figurative 'tachiste' (the French word for blot or mark) paintings in which the partial influence of contemporary American and French abstract styles is evident. For Heron dispensing with figurative imagery was a liberating experience, allowing him to 'deal more directly and inventively... with every single aspect of the painting that is purely pictorial, i.e. the architecture of the canvas, the spatial interrelation of each and every touch (and stroke, or bar) of colour... with a sense of freedom quite denied to me when I still had to keep half an eye on a 'subject' The painting covers an earlier, figurative work, traces of which can be discerned.
This series of prints is based on a game called Exquisite Corpse, a version of Consequences which was developed by the Surrealists. The players take turns to draw part of a body onto a piece of paper, which has been folded horizontally to hide what the other players have drawn. The result is a body of composite parts. These etchings feature comic-horror imagery typical of the Chapmans work: skulls, eyeballs on stalks, grotesque animal heads, liquids dripping and spurting from wounds, orifices, nipples and heads, writhing intestines, and claw-like hands and feet.
In the summer of 1889 Sargent rented a large house in Fladbury, beside the River Avon. There he made a small oil sketch  of his sister Violet standing on the river bank, holding a long fishing rod. She then posed for him for this large painting, probably out of doors, though not beside the river. The painting is unfinished, and Sargent has not yet added the fishing rod. The canvas was later rolled up, making the creases which you can see along the right hand side.
Bombergs painting commemorates an incident in the First World War, in which a company of Canadian soldiers dug tunnels under the German trenches to lay explosives. The operation was in preparation for a surprise assault on the enemy defences at Ypres. This work was a preliminary study for a painting commissioned by the Canadian Government for a War Memorial exhibition. It was criticised at the time as a Futurist abortion, although Bomberg had compromised the radical abstraction of his earlier Vorticist work for a more representational style.
Merz was fascinated by the number series named after the medieval Italian mathematician Fibonacci.  This system (originally applied to the understanding of reproduction in rabbits) extends infinitely so can be seen to correspond to proliferation in nature. The numbers increase by the addition of each preceding pair, for example, 1+1=2+1=3+2=5.  Here images of increasingly large tables are linked in a spiral, neon numbers on each following the Fibonacci system, with glasses drawn on each table corresponding to these numbers, suggesting an infinitely increasing number of diners.
In the 1960s Lowry made a number of visits to South Wales with his friend, and ardent collector of his work, Monty Bloom. Discovery of the mining villages renewed his interest in the industrial panorama as a subject for his paintings. But unlike the industrial North of England, the Welsh mining villages prompted pictures that combine a sense of urban life within a rural environment. Here, the village is depicted as if nestling in the side of the hill like an ancient Celtic site or monument. This picture was painted from notes and sketches made on the spot near Abertillery.
Gallery label, August 2004
In the early 1890s Toulouse-Lautrec made many paintings and drawings inspired by life in Parisian brothels. He is known to have spent days at a time in the brothels, where he was accepted by the prostitutes as a friend and confidant. During these periods he was able to make numerous studies of the women in casual, everyday poses, as they waited for their clients. This painting seems to be a study for part of a larger painting known as 'In the Salon', in the large collection of works by this artist at the Muse d'Albi in France.
Kelly made a number of two-panel paintings combining curved and angular shapes. He was interested in the effect of combining stable, straight-edged forms with dynamic, curved forms. These diptychs demonstrate Kellys long-standing interest in presenting shape and colour as figure against the ground of the wall. Orange Relief with Green belongs to a series of reliefs, where the forms appear to press into or penetrate one another. Here, the orange panel is superimposed onto the green panel.
Ravilious studied at the Royal College of Art, where he was taught by Paul Nash and became close friends with Edward Bawden. He went on to produce designs for Wedgwood and Stuart Crystal and advertisements for London Transport. 

 

Ravilious was attached to the Admiralty with the honorary rank of Captain, Royal Marines from February 1940. Submarines in Dry  Dock was probably painted at Chatham or Sheerness where he spent much of the  first two months of his service as a war artist. Midnight Sun was painted shortly after, on a trip to Norway in a destroyer.
As a student at the Royal College of Art, Green developed an early combination of action painting and performance art by throwing bitumen and paraffin at the surface of the painting and setting it on fire. His actions were filmed by Ken Russell for the BBC, establishing him as a pioneer of auto-destructive art. By the mid-1960s, however, Green was disillusioned by the sensationalist coverage of his work and withdrew from the art world, only beginning to produce work again in the 1990s.
Frank Dobson was a sculptor and painter associated with the post-impressionist and, briefly, vorticist movements in Britain. In 1921 he met Osbert Sitwell (18921969), an establishment figure and writer of short stories, travel books, essays, poetry and art criticism, who sat for him for three months. During one of the sittings, Sitwell met TE Lawrence, known as Lawrence of Arabia, who bought the bust and later bequeathed it to the Tate. Lawrence described it as appropriate, authentic and magnificent, in my eyes. I think its his finest piece of portraiture and in addition its as loud as the massed bands of the Guards.
Many of Gabo's sculptures first appeared as tiny models. They were often projects for monumental public schemes, rarely achieved, in which sculpture and architecture came together. His proposal  that Monument for an Airport could be used  to advertise Imperial Airways, as either a desk display or an outdoor sculpture, was never realised. Model for 'Torsion', however, was eventually translated into a large fountain outside St Thomas' Hospital in London. Gabo's increasing concern, from the late 1930s, with the aesthetic aspect of his work at the expense of the industrial can be seen in Model for 'Construction in Space "Crystal"'.
JMW Turner 1775-1851

The Disembarkation of Louis-Philippe at Portsmouth, 8 October 1844 c.1844-5

Oil paint on canvas

Tate. Accepted by the nation as part of the Turner Bequest 1856

N04660 
Turner visited Portsmouth to record the arrival of the French king, who was on a State Visit.  He made numerous sketches of the event and also painted two unfinished oils: one showing the kings arrival, the other his disembarkation.  Both are principally concerned with the atmosphere of the occasion, concentrating on the crowd of onlookers.  Turner had met Louis-Philippe when the king was living in exile at Twickenham in the 1810s. Contact between them was renewed in the mid-1830s and he was invited to dine with him at his chteau at Eu in 1845.
In the early 1970s, Latham devised a series of One Second Drawings, of which this is an example. In them, he returned to the issue of representing his idea of a least event. Latham produced a set of instructions which specified that 60 drawings were to be created, one per day, by spraying a piece of white blockboard for one second with black acrylic paint. The numerical sequence in the title of this example (17 2002) records the time of its execution (the 17th second of the 20th minute of the second hour), followed by the date (14 December 1972).
William Lindow (d.1786) was a prosperous merchant at Lancaster. His wife Abigail (1740 - 1790) was the daughter of his business partner Abram Rawlinson. Their overseas trade is suggested by a glimpse of sea and shipping in the background. Romney's account book for October 1772 lists several family portraits painted for Lindow. Among them this one is described as A Conversation of Himself and his Lady. It cost 42. The note is particularly interesting, as it demonstrates that this dignified double portrait was considered informal enough to be described as a 'conversation piece', a term normally associated with relaxed domestic ease.
At first sight Keith Coventrys series of Estate Paintings resemble the Suprematist
The champion Greek archer Teucer was one of the heroes of Homer's story of the Trojan War. When this bronze was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1882 a quotation from Pope's translation of Homer was printed in the catalogue, as the subject was unusual. Thornycroft admired the Elgin marbles, and his early works were in a Greek style. With 'Teucer', in emulation of the grandeur of Leighton's 'Athlete', he made a monumental ideal nude.The critic Edmund Gosse wrote that it had 'something almost archaic about its serenity and rigidity...this is courageously realistic'.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
The break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s unleashed savage fighting, particularly in the ethnically-mixed region of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 1993, Howson accompanied a British contingent of the United Nations Peace Keeping Force to Bosnia as the Official War Artist. Many of his resulting paintings depict scenes of appalling degradation including rape, castration and impaling. Plum Grove combines scenes witnessed by the artist with Croatian accounts of the treatment of their men by Muslim captors. Howsons works are not intended to be partisan, however, addressing individual cruelty and suffering.
Born in Fujita, Nagasaki, Iwao Yamawaki studied architecture at the Tokyo School of Arts and after graduating worked as an architect in a construction company. During this time, he took pictures with his 35mm camera to support and document his architectural studies. In 1931 he travelled to Germany to study at the Bauhaus in Dessau and became heavily influenced by Lszl Moholy-Nagys idea that photography could open up new ways of seeing the world beyond those available to the human eye. Yamawaki travelled widely in Europe and the Soviet Union, documenting modernist architecture and design, as well as capturing student life at the Bauhaus.
Emin places herself centre-stage in 

her work, telling intimate stories about her life. 'It's like a cleansing of my soul. 

It's not just getting rid of baggage or carnage. It's not that simple. Something actually happens within me.'
Steer made many visits to Walberswick in Suffolk, where he had friends. He completed a number of paintings of the beach there that are among the most authentically Impressionist works produced in Britain. They are all fluidly painted and concentrate upon effects of atmosphere and light but, unlike Monet, Steer was just as interested in the figures as their setting. When paintings like this were exhibited for the first time in Britain the 1880s and 1890s they were seen as being uncompromisingly avant-garde. One critic in 1892 even described such works at the New English Art Club exhibition as 'evil'.
This model was a prize winner in the Unknown Political Prisoner competition. Pevsner compared the Parthenon in Athens as a symbol of wisdom with the competition as a symbol of moral rebirth. He therefore sought a form for his monument that was 'plastic, architectonic and sculptural'. The monument was to be seen in its entirety from any direction. Pevsner made a full scale sculpture in bronze from this model in 1955-6. It belongs to the French National Museum of Modern Art in Paris. The model here, though somewhat simplified, indicates the surface complexity of the finished version, whose outer sides are filled in with sheet metal. The central spherical image represents captivity.
After working for many years in Paris, Soutine produced a series of works in towns in the South of France. The subject and colouring of this work are not far from the calm analysis of landscape undertaken by Czanne. However, Soutines handling of paint conveys an agitated, frenetic quality, suggesting a confrontation with the earthy forces of nature. The town reels under the painters energy and appears to rear up over us.
This lithograph was made in 1964, the year Hockney moved to Los Angeles. From his fascination with the swimming pool culture of California, Hockney became interested in the challenge of depicting the appearance and movement of water. It is, says Hockney, 'an interesting  formal problem to  represent water, to describe water, because it can be anything - it can be any colour, it's movable, it has no set visual description.'
Blake called himself a visionary, claiming he actually perceived things that are not of this world. This is the extreme end of the imagination and not far removed from 

the Surrealists fascination with dreams which, according to Freud, offered access to the unconscious. The title of this work was suggested by a Blake expert named W Graham Robertson:'A Vision'. Probably representing the Poet, in the innermost shrine of the imagination, writing from angelic diction. This reflects 

Blakes belief that his work was dictated by angels.
Self-Portrait at a Table was reworked twice. Roth originally called it Triptych of Cats, but continued working on it until it took on the structure of a self-portrait. Elements of its making (a paintbrush, a plastic spoon and fork, a map of Iceland) are embedded within the surface. Notorious for his inclusion of even more ephemeral materials, Roth also included chocolate and butter in this composition.
This 'portrait' of the Art School in the city of Norwich celebrates the building and the people who worked in it during the late 1970s and early 1980s. Wonnacott taught life drawing there, at a time when the discipline was falling out of favour; he was dismissed the year after this painting was completed. Prophetically, he shows himself, and two colleagues who left at the same time, in the foreground of the painting, walking away from  the building 'like an Expulsion from Paradise'
The delineation of overlapping rectilinear forms gives this painting a strongly architectural quality. It appears to show the influence of the Hungarian artist Laszlo Moholy-Nagy.  Moholy-Nagy taught at the Bauhuas in Germany from 1923-8.  He moved to London in 1935 and lived not far from Stephenson in Hampstead.

The fusion of art, architecture and design was a guiding principle for the international abstract movement, as it had been for the Bauhaus school.   Both movements embraced the possibility that a work or art might convey an idealistic social dimension and function.
James McIntosh Patrick was born in Dundee, the son of an architect. He studied at Glasgow School of Art, but has continued to live and work close to his native city ever since. His work can be described as possessing a clarity of draughtsmanship and a sure sense of composition. The Angus countryside around Dundee has always been his preferred subject matter, and this painting is no exception. He likes to take his ideas directly from the natural landscape, and then amalgamate various views when back in his studio. This picture entered the Tate Gallery's collection in the year in which it was painted, when the artist was twenty-eight.
Soulages first exhibited large paintings in this  style in 1947. His work is generally described as  a form of 'Gesture' painting because the heavy  brushstrokes which describe calligraphic patterns  on the surface of the canvas reflect the physical  movement of the artist's body. As in this print he  customarily combines black with the controlled  addition of primary colours.
Sutherland saw an etching by Samuel Palmer when he was studying printmaking in the early 1920s. He later recalled 'I was amazed at its completeness... [It was] quite new to us that the complex variety  of the multiplicity of lines could form a  tone of such luminosity. It seemed to me wonderful that a strong emotion, such as was Palmer's, could change and transform the appearance of things.' Like Palmer  and 'The Ancients', Sutherland was  looking back to a purer, earlier age of  art. His religious intensity is highlighted  by the cross put after the date in the top right hand corner.
Turner visited thirteenth-century Caernarvon in North Wales in 1798, and made lively colour studies in his Academical sketchbook (Tate). This oil sketch was an intermediate step towards a large watercolour version which he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1799. As a young man Turner is said to have wept when he saw a seaport painted by Claude Lorrain because I shall never be able to paint anything like that picture. However, the Claudean model of a central sun over water flanked by buildings and shipping served him well in numerous paintings of classical history and myth.
The organic curves of Deacon's sculpture were inspired by parts of the human body. The title is taken from the Biblical phrase 'He that hath ears to hear let him hear' and relates to Deacon's interest in the way eyes, ears and mouths channel our perceptions of the world. The sculpture also resembles forms found in nature, echoing the shape of a hilly landscape. The oozing resin and rings in the wood are reminders that this material was itself once alive, and part of nature.
This sculptural installation incorporates a Victrola, a gramophone player fitted into a furniture casing, which Paik has painted with graffiti-like symbols. The Victrola was a popular product in American homes from the late 1900s to the 1920s. Paik seems to be emphasising its outmoded quality, with smashed vinyl records, and a plasma screen attached to the wall showing an early performance in which Paik breaks a disc. However, the screen can also be seen as a contemporary equivalent to the Victrola, affirming the place of communications technology in the modern home.
Inside this box is a photograph of the artist's face with pins stuck at regular intervals along the contours of his cheek, moustache and mouth. According to Samaras the pins are lines, marks and dots, they create a net pattern which gives a strange illusion. For Samaras, the box represents an equivalent to the human body. He sees making one of his boxes as a series of erotic gestures. In Greece, where I was born, the words for lick and sculpt are the same.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, April 2005
This painting is from an extensive series of works that developed from an earlier series also titled 'Chance and Order'. The title refers to the combination of chance events and the artist's ordering procedures that made the painting. To create the network of lines, the artist first marked a drawing with points, moving clockwise round a rectangle. Lines were then generated by taking numbers, two at a time, at random out of a bag. Martin chose eight pairs of numbers for this work. He then instigated the Change of the title by turning the drawing through 90 degrees and repeating the process. This process was repeated twice more. The drawing was then transferred to canvas.
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include museums, dealers, curators and art critics. They fly-posted their first posters overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo, and have also displayed their work as advertisements on city buses. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use the names of famous deceased artists and writers as pseudonyms.
As a Polish Jew and a socialist, Adler left Germany when the National Socialist party came to power in 1933. He worked in Warsaw and Paris before arriving in Britain with the Polish army. The work Adler made during the Second World War was clearly affected by his own experiences as a refugee, and by the first news of the concentration camps. The Mutilated was painted in London during heavy bombing and reflected, Adler said, his admiration for the behaviour of Londoners under great stress and suffering, adding, only then could humanity be seen at its best.
The design shown here occupies the top part of a page in Visions of the Daughters  of Albion. It illustrates lines from an earlier page: 'Why does my Theotormon sit weeping upon the threshhold: / And Oothoon hovers by his side, perswading him in vain:'. In the frontispiece, shown above, the female Oothoon can also be seen, with her lover Theotormon crouched  in despair. In the book the daughters of Albion - the women of England - are described as 'enslav'd' and weeping.  This sentiment can be associated with  Mary Wollstonecraft's book A Vindication  of the Rights of Women, 1792.
Location draws attention to the relationship between a work and its immediate surroundings. Four small arrows point towards the floor, the ceiling, and the walls on either side of the work. When it is positioned in the gallery, the meters next to each arrow are adjusted to register the distance in feet to the edge of the room. As well as precisely recording the location of the work, these measurements make viewers aware of their own relation to the space.
Gallery label, August 2004
Milroy's work in the 1980s depicted household objects such as shoes or lightbulbs set in rows against a neutral background. In the 1990s she began a series of travel paintings, which take their subject matter from three capital cities, Tokyo, Rome and London. Milroy's London paintings focus on the clinical facades of office buildings in Holborn, Euston, Old Street and Finsbury Square. Depicted in flat unmodulated colour the usually teeming streets and busy offices are unnaturally denuded of human life. This paring down suggests both the idealistic purity of modern architecture and the alienating effect of some urban environments.
This is one of the very few abstract works by Fry  to have survived, and is one of three he exhibited  in 1915. His use of the bus tickets was clearly  inspired by Picasso. Fry has used real tickets and  stuck them down to the painted board. They are for  Route 88, which runs past the Tate Gallery,  although from a different stage of that route. It  was Fry who gave intellectual focus to the  Bloomsbury Group of artists and writers. He had  trained as a painter in France and Italy, and with  Sickert in London, but became best known as a  highly influential writer, critic and lecturer.  Fry organised two exhibitions of  Post-Impressionist art in 1910 and 1912,  showing types of European pictures then little  known in Britain.
This life-size figure was intended to be one  of a pair, never completed, called 'The Visitation'. This was an event recorded in the Bible, where  the Virgin Mary visits her cousin Elizabeth  to share with her the news that she is to  give birth to Jesus. Epstein described this  figure as expressing ' a humility so profound  as to shame the beholder who comes to my sculpture expecting rhetoric or splendour  of gesture'. When he first exhibited it he called  it 'A Study' so as to diguise its content.
The painting is unfinished but was intended to become a subject from Homer's 'Odyssey' or 'Iliad'. The scenery is clearly Mediterranean, and there are suggestions of figures on the beach at left, and antique ships in the right distance and under the cliffs at left.
The Bloomsbury artists often focused their attention on their immediate surroundings, painting their friends engaged in such activities as painting, reading or writing, as well as the objects and furnishings (often home-made) in their rooms. This painting shows the view between the front and back rooms on the first floor of 46 Gordon Square in London, where Grant lived for a time with Vanessa Bell; the front room was her studio. The composition shows that Grant was familiar with recent developments in France such as cubism.
Hepworth said that this work was inspired  by the interaction of people and architecture  in the Piazza San Marco in Venice. Each form  bears 'a specific and absolute position in relation  to the others'. Her use of Serravazza marble,  a quintessential classical material, is appropriate  to such an Italianate source. The artist associated white marble with the Mediterranean sun. In fact, the base and the figures were all carved from a mantlepiece salvaged from her neighbour's house.
This portrait was probably begun to mark the marriage of Hogarths friend Ashley Cowper to Dorothy Oakes in about 1730. Their marriage is referred to through the priestly figure officiating at an altar on the urn behind them, and by the Latin inscription on the pedestal by the poet Virgil. Here, Gallus, a pilgrim in Arcadia, states how he would willingly give up hunting with his hounds in order to be with his beloved shepherdess. Likewise, Cowper turns away from his favourite dog towards his new wife.The child is probably the couples eldest daughter, Theodora, who was added to the picture at a later date.
In the late 1930s Moynihan was associated with the Euston Road School, committed to realist painting. In 1940 he trained as an artillery man and was commissioned in camouflage before becoming a war artist in 1943. Many of his portraits of high-ranking officers and advisers are now in the Imperial War Museum. His portraits were often swiftly executed but sensitively observed. Influenced by artists such as Edouard Manet and Diego Velazquez, Moynihan used a rich sensuous brushstroke to convey a sense of this young service woman's physicality. During the war women were urged to look their best at all times to boost morale. Lipstick became known as the 'red badge of courage'.
Jersey depicts the interior of a barbershop in Kingsland, Jamaica. Anderson was born in the UK to parents of West Indian descent. His paintings evoke a sense of, as he puts it, being in one place but thinking about another. While the photographic sources provide a degree of distance, the process of compiling the image allows for a play of memory and perception, and a shift of register between representation and abstraction.
Many of Gabo's sculptures first appeared as tiny models. They were often projects for monumental public schemes, rarely achieved, in which sculpture and architecture came together. His proposal  that Monument for an Airport could be used  to advertise Imperial Airways, as either a desk display or an outdoor sculpture, was never realised. Model for 'Torsion', however, was eventually translated into a large fountain outside St Thomas' Hospital in London. Gabo's increasing concern, from the late 1930s, with the aesthetic aspect of his work at the expense of the industrial can be seen in Model for 'Construction in Space "Crystal"'.
The charitable offer of a lollipop to a blind working-class girl is painted with exactness and clear bright colour. James Campbell was well known for contemporary subjects like this, showing the life of the urban poor. He became known as the most Dickensian of all the Pre-Raphaelites.Campbell was one of a group of painters within the Liverpool Academy of Arts who were keen followers of Pre-Raphaelite artists working in London. This was the first picture he exhibited in London, at the Society of British Artists in 1855.
Gallery label, April 2005
The starting point for this composition was a dried leaf, which Agar had specially preserved within the pages of a book. The ageing leaf may also have suggested the themes evoked in the painting, as described by Agar: The whole watercolour was intended to suggest a symbolic reaper with the flailing movement of the scythe-like concentric forms. The title indeed relates to time, the seasons and especially death the Great Reaper. The dead leaf being the hub of the whole.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, August 2004
This work belongs to a series called Paris Circus, which reflect the excitement of Dubuffets return to the city after living in the countryside for seven years. In the intervening period, he had attempted to remove all human presence, including his own, from his work. The new Paris pictures, by contrast, were teeming with humanity. Dubuffet wrote: The presence in them of the painter now is constant, even exaggerated. They are full of personages, and this time their role is played with spirit'.
Gallery label, August 2004
Tanguy moved to the United States in 1939 with the painter Kay Sage, paving the way for the Surrealists' wartime exile in New York. Influenced by the light and space of America, Tanguy began to work on a larger scale. His new works featured partly mechanical, partly biomorphic forms set against awesome skies. The title of this painting can be related to the Surrealists' preoccupation in the 1940s with the theme of otherworldly beings - 'invisibles' - that escape normal understanding.
During the 1920s, Ben and Winifred Nicholson lived in a house close to Hadrians Wall in Cumberland. Their lifestyle was simple and traditional; they shared at that time a belief in Christian Science. In their art too they sought to escape the sophistication of established artists, including Bens father William Nicholson. Painting mostly landscape, they cultivated a deliberately nave style which was reinforced by an encounter in 1928 with the untutored amateur painter Alfred Wallis.
This sculpture was exhibited in the British section of the 1952 Venice Biennale, along with works by Reg Butler, Lynn Chadwick, Bernard Meadows and others. Though in his catalogue essay, Herbert Read associated their art with Cold War anxieties, Armitages work was often humorous or faintly erotic.
The portrait has always been known as Mrs Johnstone and her Son since it was acquired in 1898, but probably represents instead Mrs Martha Ford, the mistress of West Florida governor George Johnstone, and their son, Alexander Patrick Johnstone. Johnstone married Charlotte Dee in Portugal in 1782, after the relationship with Martha Ford had ended, but there is documentation suggesting that this portrait was painted in the late 1770s. The identity of the sitters was perhaps left deliberately vague when the painting was bequeathed to the nation by a descendant of Governor Johnstone.
Arp developed a distinctive repertoire of abstracted shapes for his sculptural reliefs. The same motifs, repeated from work to work, were intended as a kind of object language. One of these symbols was the moustache, which Arp associated with pomposity. A common affectation of figures of authority, the moustache embodied the spirit of bourgeois stupidity that had precipitated the First World War. It was only around the time of making this work that the German-born Arp secured his French nationality, having been stateless since refusing to fight in the war.
By making works placed directly on the floor, Andre challenged traditional conventions of sculptural practice and presentation. Venus Forge is an arrangement of metal tiles that can be walked on by the viewer, emphasising the relationship between sculpture and floor. Andre also draws attention to his materials, contrasting highly polished copper with the dark surface of steel. The number of tiles is potentially endless.  In theory, Venus Forge could stretch forever.
This work resulted from a ten-day meandering circular walk in the Scottish Highlands. Each section describes the work in different ways. The left hand section bears the title, which for Long embodies the idea of the walk. The central section lists chronologically the places he passed on the walk. The right section describes Longs ideas, thoughts and experiences mixed up and floated in time.

Long used a map, which though full of names was otherwise largely featureless (he was mainly walking in wilderness). Long brings together the objective information from the map and the experiences he had on the walk.
Poured Painting was made by aggressively throwing and pouring bright red paint directly from the tin onto a large rectangular piece of sacking fixed to the wall, evoking associations of splattered and dripping blood. Nitsch made other paintings in the series by pouring paint onto the floor, or by rolling his body in it. He often used red paint and blood in his performances, which were highly ritualistic and often violent, invoking extreme emotional and psychological states.
This is one of a group of seven prints on the theme of reflections. Lichtenstein regularly paraphrases pre-existing images in his art, often reusing aspects of his own works, and Reflections on Brushstrokes refers back to his 1960s Brushstroke paintings. One such close-up of a schematised brushstroke forms the base image of the present print. It is partly obscured by semi-abstract blocks of colour and pattern, both printed and collaged to the surface of the print, to simulate reflected light, as if the image were behind glass or reflected in another surface.
Constable and his wife visited Netley Abbey, Hampshire on their honeymoon in 1816. One of the drawings made on that occasion was the basis for this much later watercolour. In character it resembles the designs Constable painted in 1833 to illustrate an edition of Gray's 'Elegy'. He may even have considered using this Netley composition for that work: the figure at the left contemplating a tombstone (a detail not in the original pencil drawing) is a stock motif in all illustrations of the 'Elegy'. At the same time this melancholy image, based on a honeymoon drawing, would have carried a personal meaning for Constable in his widowhood.
This is a version of an unfinished picture now in  the Menil Foundation Collection, Houston. The  existence of many versions of this work can be  explained by the fact that Sir Joshua Reynolds  encouraged his students to copy it. The sitter is  thought to be Francis (Frank) Barber, the servant  of Dr Johnson. Johnson held Barber in high esteem,  flouting convention by educating him and making  him his principal heir. Here, Reynolds has  dignified the sitter, posing him in the manner  usually preserved for an aristocratic white man.  The original version was probably painted in the  1770s, a period at which the slave trade was still  in operation in America and Europe's colonies.
Gallery label, April 2005
Beuys assembled this vitrine in 1983 to represent the principle themes of his life and work. He often used unusual materials for his sculptures, investing them with personal or spiritual significance. The objects in this case all include fat, a material that Beuys considered very basic to life. The ones on the left also use beeswax, which symbolised warmth for Beuys. In the middle is a sealed jar containing pork dripping, with a thermometer resting on it. On the right are Fat Corner, also made of pork dripping, and Depression, a zinc box filled with tallow from mutton.
Caulfield explores different styles of representation, subverting our expectations about what is real and what is illusory. The scene features a picture-within-a-picture, a device common in his work. The carefully copied source of the still life is Meal by Candlelight, by the seventeenth-century German artist Gottfried von Wedig. Candles often appeared in vanitas
paintings, symbolising the brevity of human existence. Because of the abstracted style used for the setting, the painting appears more real than the space in which it hangs.
Gallery label, September 2004
Although left in a rudimentary state, this picture suggests a stormy sea with choppy waves beneath a blank sky. Turners brushstrokes at the corners of the painting could indicate that he intended to create a whirling vortex of waves and clouds, just as he did in Snow Storm: Steamboat off a Harbours Mouth (1842).

A dark shape at the centre of the work could be a large ship or a pier, and it has been suggested that two reddish-brown shapes on either side may be the sails of smaller boats.
An advertisement for a drainpipe was the source for this work. Like many of Oldenburg's sculptures, it renders a familiar object strange through its recreation in surprising materials and colours. The transformation of hard into soft objects is a recurrent theme in his sculpture. Adjusting the pulley can alter the appearance and dimensions of the work, producing a variety of shapes that suggest a crucified figure, an elephant's trunk and ears, or male genitalia.
Sisley lived in Svres, on the outskirts of Paris, between 1877 and 1880. While there, he painted ten pictures from the bridge, all from slightly different viewpoints. Most date from 1877. This one is painted looking south, with the first houses of Billancourt on the left and Svres on the right.
This is Catherine Milcah Ingram, the daughter of a Warwickshire clergyman. In 1761 she had married Michael Woodhull, a wealthy and distinguished translator of Euripides, collector of books and prints, and a minor poet. The painting is said to have been begun as a half-length portrait of just head and shoulders, but Mrs Woodhull liked it so much that she asked Zoffany to enlarge it to a full-length picture. Joins in the canvas and some overpainting seem to confirm this. The painting was probably commissioned to hang in the library at Thenford, the Woodhull family seat in Northamptonshire.
The first of four pictures telling the story  of Aeneas's stay at Carthage, delayed from  his destiny in Italy by his love for Dido, which  were Turner's last exhibits at the Royal Academy, and of which three now survive. They are his  final reconsiderations of the classic style of  Claude. Here, Aeneas stands on the left in  his cloak of Tyrian purple, attended by Cupid. Mercury, who according to Turner's accompanying lines from his manuscript poem Fallacies of Hope 'waited to tell him of his neglected fleet' is not discernible, having perhaps melted into thin  air as Virgil's story describes.
Gallery label, August 2004
In Marilyn Monroe, Warhol found a fusion of two of his consistent themes: death and the cult of celebrity. The star died tragically in August 1962.  In the following two years, Warhol made thirty silkscreen paintings of her, always using the same publicity photograph from the 1953 film Niagara. This set of ten screenprints was produced in 1967, in an edition of 250. The repeated image serves as the basis for a series of startling colour transformations.
Henry Moore stated that in his work he was  obsessed by two themes, the Mother and Child and  the Reclining Figure. This is a major example of  the second theme, with the upright piece  representing the head and torso, while the lower  piece represents the legs of the figure. Moore's  reclining figures are always female because he  equated woman with life, survival, fecundity and  endurance. This work is one of two that Moore made  as prototypes for a reclining figure commissioned  for the new Lincoln Center of the Performing Arts  in New York. The figure was to be twenty-eight  feet long and seventeen feet high.
This painting depicts Regent's Park, as seen from the artist's studio in Gloucester Gate. From the early 1960s until 1988, when Berg left London, this particular view of Regent's Park was one of his principal subjects. The composition of the painting does not follow conventional rules of perspective. Instead the painting may be seen, as the artist puts it, 'four ways round'. He has explained: 'Everything in the painting can be seen from my studio window. Naturally I can see through an arc of 180 degrees. In choosing to fill a square canvas with this view I have joined up what I see on the extreme left to what I see on the extreme right.'
Towards the end of her year working in Germany, Hesse produced a group of particularly free and bold drawings. While earlier drawings had suggested complex machines with a number of interlinked parts, she now concentrated on isolated organic elements that anticipate the sculptures she would begin to make when she returned to New York. Like other works by Hesse, this drawing suggests references to the body while remaining abstract.
Appelbee studied art in London first at Goldsmiths' College and then at the Royal College of Art, completing his studies in 1938. This small still life picture was acquired by the Tate Gallery in 1940, the year Appelbee began his six years of service in the Army. As well as 'The King Crab' the artist painted a number of sea creatures in the 1930s, including a lobster and fish. Here the crab is barely contained within the picture. Its size is emphasised by the way it dominates the surface of the canvas. The crab's angular legs and claws are mirrored by the hard-edge treatment of the table and paper on which it rests.
In the early 1920s, Schwitters started to make ''found'' artworks. In Measure (left), the image is taken from a magazine, to which he has added  a line drawing Koi (right), was created ten years later. Beyond the choice of the material, Schwitters may not have made any alterations. The printed paper probably comes from the printing works that Schwitters frequented in his capacity as a designer. The blocks of print are arranged into a geometrical structure reminiscent of Constructivist compositions. As all the lettering is reversed the paper must be an offprint from printers' proofs.
In this work, Craig-Martin is exploring the nature of art making, in particular raising philosophical and perceptual questions about the relationship of art to the reality it represents. His intention is to use simple, familiar objects used for the making of a drawing to reveal the ambiguities, contradictions, and complexities normally unrecognised in the process of representation. The work consists of a set of 5 drawings using various graphic means to create an actual-size representation of a previous work that consisted of 5 sets of identical real objects - clipboard, paper, pencil, written title, eraser - each with one missing.
This lively pair of portraits was commissioned by John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute. It was probably Bute who introduced Zoffany to the King and Queen, commencing a highly successful period of royal patronage for the artist.In the portrait on the right, Butes three younger sons have abandoned their game of archery to go bird-nesting. In the companion picture his three daughters play with pet squirrels. The setting for both portraits is Butes country estate, Luton Park, Bedfordshire, which he acquired in 1763. These portraits display both Butes progeny and his position as an important landowner.
This picture shows the twelve year old Jesus being carried back to Nazareth. This happened after Joseph and Mary had returned to Jerusalem and found Jesus with the elders in the Temple. The artist used chapter 2 of the Gospel according to St Luke as his source. Like other works by Dobson, this picture reflects the time he spent with the German Nazarene artists in Germany and Italy during the 1840s and 1850s. The Nazarene style was characterized by a fairly vigorous handling of gesture and design. This was to influence the Pre- Raphaelites. Dobson avoided the censure which greeted these artists because his characterization was diluted, as here, by a degree of sentimentalization.
The model for this painting was Gabrielle Renard  (1878-1959), a cousin of Renoir's wife who helped  in the running of the household. She also was  Renoir's favourite model, her rounded body  exemplifying the artist's ideal of female beauty.  The treatment of her breasts and stomach has  precedents in classical statuary, while the  feathery brushwork recalls the style of such old  masters as Rubens, Boucher and Fragonard.
Constable painted at least three versions of this composition, one of which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1820. The lighthouse, known as the Low Lighthouse, was one of two at Harwich. Both were leased at the time by Constable's friend and patron, Major-General Slater-Rebow of Wivenhoe Park.
In 1937 Pasmore was instrumental in setting up the Euston Road School of Painting, with two other painters, Claude Rogers and William Coldstream. The purpose of the Euston Road School was to teach traditional disciplines and the adoption of an objective approach to the chosen subject. The School closed in 1939 with the onset of war, but Pasmore continued to paint in the manner of its teachings during the 1940s. He produced a series of small and tender portrait and nude studies of his wife, Wendy, whom he married in June 1940. This is one of them and it presents Wendy Pasmore in a quiet and intimate manner, with the parted curtains adding to the private nature of the scene.
The water nymph Undine was born without 

a soul. She gains one by marrying a human, but in return has to take on the burdens 

of the world. Turner shows her offering 

a wedding ring to a fisherman. The story 

was written by the German writer Friedrich De La Motte Foucque, though Turner probably knew it from versions on the London stage.
Over a year McLean made these six sculptures from natural materials. He returned them to the environment, so these photographs are the only record of their existence. The sculptures demonstrate McLeans interest in time and its passing. With Floataway Sculpture, the water currents break up the sculpture, transforming the piece into an event. In his continuing attempts to resist the commodification of the art object, McLean later moved to performance and Body art.
By the time Pollard painted this picture, stage coach travel was beginning to be threatened by the rise of the new railway system. For many observers stage coaches were seen not only as one of lifes essentials, but also as a picturesque part of English life. From the details included by Pollard in this picture, this particular coach can be identified as the Tally-Ho London to Birmingham coach. This would leave The Saracens Head inn on Snow Hill in Holborn at 7.45 am, and arrive at the Swan Hotel in Birmingham eleven hours later.
Kossoffs principal subjects are his family and friends, and the parts of London best knownto him, and he reflected that, when painting public scenes, portraits of people close to him begin to appear within the crowd. This large painting belongs to a series depicting Kilburn Underground station in north London. Kossoff stated that the shuddering feet of the sprawling city linger in my mind like a faintly glimmering memory of a long forgotten, perhaps never experienced childhood which, if rediscovered and illuminated, would ameliorate the pain of the present.
Gallery label, September 2004
This is the sequel to the painting, Waiting for the Verdict, which is also on display here. Solomon sets the drama in a provincial town during the assizes, or temporary courts. The setting, costume and accessories are all painted with great attention to detail.Solomon reveals the familys relief now that the man has been acquitted. It seems he was wrongly accused or the victim of a malicious charge. In the background a bystander points accusingly at a man leaving the courthouse. It is clear that the guilty man is escaping and the original charge was malicious.
In June 1948 Nolan embarked on a period of travel to remote areas of Australia. Travelling by truck, train, aeroplane and boat, he journeyed inland across New South Wales to Adelaide. He then went north across the central desert to Darwin, returning via the Western coast to Sydney. The view of inland Australia seen from the air made the greatest impression on Nolan. He was profoundly affected by the vast scale, desolation and silence of the desert - the second largest in the world. Like his many other paintings of this subject, this work is what Nolan called a 'composite impression'. It combines documentary observation with visionary imagination, faithfully evoking a landscape whose immensity seems strangely unreal.
Five Sisters is one of the derelict land sites in the Midlothian and West Lothian area which Latham, during his placement with the Scottish Development Office, proposed should be preserved as monuments (see Derelict Land Art: Five Sisters displayed nearby). Lathams proposals included a suggestion for the erection of large sculptures, in the form of books, on the summits of the shale heaps or bings. This proposal was never carried out but the arrangement of the books which form this work echoes the shape and appearance of the Five Sisters Bing.
Gallery label, August 2004
Goyas painting of a dogs head peering upwards from behind a slope, painted directly onto the walls of his house, was the inspiration for Sauras Imaginary Portrait of Goya. Saura explained: I have always thought of this head as Goya himself watching something happen. While evoking a great national tradition, this portrait may have been quietly subversive. Goya was famous as a witness to the corruption and barbarities of the Napoleonic invasion. Saura, painting at a time when General Franco still ruled Spain, invoked this spirit but turned the watching head outwards on the contemporary world.
In the 1940s Giacometti began to make tall, emaciated figures with roughly defined outlines, which appear to represent the human figure seen from a distance. He explained that when he made large figures, they seemed false. It was only when he portrayed them as long and slender that they seemed true to his vision of humanity. Venice Woman IX was the last of a group of standing female figures made by Giacometti for the French Pavilion of the 1956 Venice Biennale.
This portrait
'The Return from Cythera' is the second of Allen's two versions of this subject. The work depicts a picnic at the moment when, as day draws to a close, the group of friends realise that they must return home. The picture is set in the Oxfordshire countryside which Allen loved and where he lived. But in the distance is the image of the cooling towers of the power station at Didcot, which Allen disliked. The figures are thus caught between an imaginative, pastoral idyll and the problems of the modern industrial world. The title and some of the work's imagery were inspired by Watteau but the painting was intended more as a tribute to Titian.
This picture shows part of the pond and farm lands which lay just outside the front entrance of Charleston farmhouse, a house Grant shared with Vanessa Bell and her family from 1916 until his death in 1978. Charleston is situated near to Lewes, Sussex and at the foot of the South Downs. Both Grant and Bell had their own studios in the farmhouse and views of its exterior and interior were the subject of many of their paintings. They also lavished their decorative talents upon the walls, doors, furniture, textiles and ceramics within the farmhouse, all of which is still intact. The farmhouse and garden are open to the public.
From the mid-1920s Moore had advocated the abolition of the 'Greek ideal' in sculpture in favour of non-European sources, which he felt had much greater vitality. This work reveals his fascination with the Mesopotamian sculptures in the British Museum, especially solemn standing figures with clasped hands. He reviewed a book on Mesopotamian art for 'The Listener' in June 1935. Around 1931-2 Moore also turned his attention to the study of natural forms, such as shells, bones and pebbles. He then brought together his studies in natural forms with his admiration for non-European 'primitive' sculpture and began to introduce a rhythmic and non-naturalistic approach to the depiction of the human figure.
Gallery label, July 2008
This is one of six paintings and numerous drawings by Sickert of his frame-makers daughter, known affectionately as Little Rachel. Sickert described the series as a set of studies of Illumination  A little Jewish girl of 13 or so with red hair. Here the young girls gaze is averted from both the artist and the view across Mornington Crescent Gardens out of the window. There is no key to her thoughts but, she is on the brink of adulthood; the closed window possibly suggests her future confinement as wife and mother.
Lewis was working on this painting in the year of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. The conflict in Spain was the setting for Lewis's novel 'The Revenge for Love', which was published in 1937. However, Lewis denied any connection between this picture and the book. In 1950 Lewis wrote: 'In the Surrender of Barcelona I set out to paint a Fourteenth Century scene as I should do it could I be transported there, without too great change in the time adjustment involved.' The frieze of soldiers in the foreground can be seen as alluding to Velasquez's painting 'Surrender of Breda' 1635.
This is the Villa of Maecenas in Tivoli, near Rome. Maecenas had been one of the greatest Roman patrons of the arts. This made him a subject of great interest to eighteenth-century art collectors.But he was also perceived as the personification of decadent luxury. The ruins of his villa therefore embodied both a high point of classical civilisation and the cause of its collapse. So this poetic landscape held a moral lesson for the contemporary viewer.
Monnington studied at the Slade School of Art from 1918-22. He then spent the years 1922-5 as a Scholar in Decorative Painting at the British School at Rome, where this painting was begun. The landscape is taken from studies made around the Umbrian town of Piediluco; the imagery was partly inspired by general ideas about Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, but also more particularly by Monnington's love of Italy and delight in his marriage in 1924 to Winifred Knights, a fellow painter at the British School. The Adam and Eve-like figures are based on Monnington and Knights. Two paintings by Knights are also on display in this gallery.
The sitter, Edith Sitwell (1887-1964) was the  daughter of Sir George Sitwell, 4th Baronet, and  sister of Sir Osbert and Sachaverell Sitwell. She  was a poet and at the time of this portrait she  was editor of 'Wheels', an annual anthology of new  poetry published between 1916 and 1921. Edith  Sitwell is seated on an Omega Workshops dining  chair, a modern piece of furniture designed by the  painter and art critic Roger Fry, who ran his  decorative arts venture, the Omega Workshops, from  33 Fitzroy Square, London, in the heart of  Bloomsbury. Both Edith Sitwell and Alvaro Guevara  patronised the Omega Workshops.
This book comprises a sequence of 25 woodcuts, that suggest a journey downstream along the banks of the Rhine. The river is central to Germany''s geographical and historical development, acquiring an almost mythic significance in works such as Wagner''s Ring of the Nibelungs. Scenes of the unspoiled river are interrupted by dark, swirling pages that represent the sinking of the battleship Bismark in 1945, during an Atlantic sortie codenamed Rhine Exercise.
Following 'The Burial of Count Orgaz' 1958 (also in this room), in 1959-60 Latham made four book reliefs. These comprise the 'Observer' series of which this is the final work. Like the other three reliefs, 'Observer IV' has a triangular composition. The three points forming this structure represent three kinds of 'observing persons' which Latham connects with the three brothers in Dostoevsky's novel 'The Brothers Karamazov'. He interprets the brothers as representing three states of existence and self-awareness. The three points in the work thus correspond with the brothers and, in turn, with the states that the brothers represent. The mass of material on the right relates to Mitya who signifies spontaneous experience and instinct. Mitya is connected by a tube to Ivan at the top of the canvas who signifies an intellectual state capable of observing the Mitya state. The small, wedge shape at bottom left is linked with Aloysha - independent of Mitya and Ivan and signifying a higher reflective level capable of observing the other two. Dostoevsky's novel informed Latham's view of the artist as an 'incidental person' who, like Aloysha, is an independent observer, reflecting and reaching insights through intuition. Latham has commented that the 'Observer' series 'isn't intended as allegory but as geometry (evenometry) of the three basic kinds of person.'
Modigliani made more than seventy drawings of caryatids. Their highly stylised manner shows his absorption in a wide variety of arts then considered to be primitive, including African and especially Cambodian carvings. The drawings were preparatory sketches for sculptures, and Modigliani is said to have conceived of a temple to humanity surrounded by hundreds of such caryatids. However, he appears to have made only one carving directly related to this crouching figure.
William Nicholson and Mabel Pryde painted several portraits of their four children. Here, Annie Mary Nancy Nicholson (18991977) is eleven years old. There is no sentimentality about the scene and a theatrical effect is created by the dark interior and the harlequin outfit, one of several costumes kept in the family dressing-up box. Mabel Nicholson died in the influenza epidemic in 1918. Nancy became an artist too, and in the same year married the writer Robert Graves.
Pipers abstract works were made between 1934 and 1937, during the height of his involvement with the British avant-garde. At the time the British scene was heavily influenced by the works of continental artists, as was reflected in the magazine Axis on which Piper worked with his future wife Myfanwy Evans. Few of these works have survived; this one was dismantled, but was reconstructed by the artist in 1967, following a photograph and using some original elements.
All of these sculptures are carved  from alabaster. The varying qualities  of the same stone are immediately evident. Gaudier-Brzeska used gilding (now discoloured) to give his relief an antique quality. The softness of alabaster suits it to Hepworth's organic forms and she exploited this characteristic to incise such details as facial features and abstract patterns.
Uecker began to make reliefs using nails in the late 1950s. The white composition allows the nails to create patterns of shadow across the surface, responding to the light in the room but also seeming to change in relation to the viewers own position. Uecker was a member of Zero, an artists group that aimed to establish a new beginning in art and culture: the name relates to the last point in a countdown before a rocket is launched.
This work is based on a cast taken from the head of a living model named William Jeffrey. Casting from life involves encasing the sitter's head in wet plaster. After this has hardened, the resulting mould is taken apart in sections, and from this a cast in fibreclass is made. The advantage of this process is that an exact facsimile of the subject's features is obtained. Despite their precision, Davies has observed that life casts communicate little about the subject's character. Also, this realistic cast incorporates the strange addition of cones of chicken wire placed over the face. Consequently, this head does not characterise an individual, but represents human personality in general.
Hiltons work oscillated between complete non-representation and degrees of figuration. In the end he came to believe that was only a step towards a new sort of figuration
Ann Trotter posed for this portrait in 1788, the year after her marriage to Robert Trotter, who was subsequently Postmaster-General for Scotland. She sat for the artist in Spring 1788, but it was delivered a year later. 18th-century portraitists would typically only focus on painting the main features of a portrait, particularly the face, during sittings, completing the costume and background subsequently. In this case, there is technical evidence which suggests that Romney rushed the completion of the picture, and changed his mind about painting in the sitters right arm, presumably in response to the Trotters demands that the portrait be completed.
In the 1830s and 1840s, increasing numbers of fairy pictures appeared on the walls of the Royal Academy, and by the middle of the century the taste for fairy painting was well established. Many of the subjects were taken from Shakespeares play A Midsummer Nights Dream, as was this example which attracted very great attention when shown at the Academy in 1847. Titania, Queen of the Fairies, has been lulled to sleep by her attendants, who are just disappearing from view in the shadowy distance to the left. Huskisson includes a painted frame resembling a proscenium arch, thus increasing the theatrical effect.
The naval dockyard at Portsmouth was heavily bombed during the Second World War along with many other strategically important ports and industrial cities. The Ministry of Information sent artists across the country to record such attacks. In Portsmouth, Eurich made the drawings for this work the day after the heavy bombing partly due to the presence of two battleships in the harbour. At the centre of Eurichs composition is a vessel from an earlier conflict: HMS Victory, Nelsons flagship at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805. Its presence in the composition recalls a glorious naval history amid the chaos and destruction of the Blitz.
The original of this bronze was a carved plaster column set on a wooden base. The plaster was sent to Paris in 1938 for an exhibition and remained there until 1961. In 1963 Hepworth had it cast in an edition of seven. By the mid 1930s Hepworth had turned from carving semi-naturalistic figures and animals to an exploration of pure sculptural forms. She has written that her interest then centred on the relationship between a form and its surrounding space as well as its integral size, texture and weight. But these sculptures almost always retained an organic character.
Hlion, one of the most prominent abstract artists in Paris in the 1930s, recorded the progress of many of his works in a studio notebook. The passage written about Ile de France reveals his doubts about the relation between abstract art and reality: The oppositions are developing. The colours are becoming refined, the space more supple, but the more I advance the more evident is the attraction of nature. The space is provisionally, miraculously, filled with light but the volumes want to become complete: objects, bodies.
In the 1920s, the new critical approach of writers such as Roger Fry and R.H. Wilenski released a number of British sculptors from a slavish veneration of Greek art. They began to question classical standards of beauty by looking afresh at the art of non-European cultures. Eric Gill's interest in the art of non-European cultures developed before the 1920s, largely through the influence of the philosopher and theologian Ananda Coomaraswamy. In 1908 Coomaraswamy's lecture on Indian Art made a deep impression on Gill. In this sculpture Gill explores the relationship between the sacred and the profane, drawing in particular on traditional Indian sculpture.
An inscription on the original backing of this painting describes the occasion shown here: The painting represents an episode in Millaiss own life when he was sent for by people unknown to him, but who knew him to be a young artist, to draw a portrait of a girl in her coffin before her burial. The scene moved him so much that when he got home he made this sketch showing himself being asked to draw the girls portrait.The morbidity of this subject can be compared with Millaiss Ophelia
also on display in this gallery.
The basic oval form of Head is an example of the extreme simplicity of Brancusi's wooden carvings. Brancusi associated direct carving and a sympathy for natural materials with the peasant traditions of his native Romania, as well as with African sculpture. Head was originally part of a larger work known as Plato or Little French Girl II, which also included a pole-like neck, torso, legs and large protruding feet. Brancusi cut off the head around 1923 and apparently threw the rest away.
Elizabeth Roydon is shown here as the widow of her second husband, Cuthbert Vaughan, who died in 1563 in action in France. She married Sir Thomas Golding of Belchamp St Paul, Essex, the following year. Her maiden arms of Roydon, in the top left hand corner, were added later, presumably by one of her descendants, to emphasise her status as an heiress in her own right. The restraint of her attire is appropriate for a widow. The HE monogram of the Antwerp-trained artist Hans Eworth can be seen also in the top left hand corner.
This scene shows Mr Bs most dastardly attempt to seduce Pamela. Aided by the unprincipled housekeeper Mrs Jewkes, shown in bed to the right, Mr B hides in Pamelas bedroom. He sits disguised as a maid with an apron thrown over his head, waiting to jump into bed with her. Highmore produced his illustrations independently of Richardson, though the two men became close friends as a result of the paintings.
Lichtenstein devised a project to mass-produce dinnerware in 1966. In this set, he has applied to the surface of the objects graphic symbols usually employed in advertising images or cartoons to suggest shading and depth. As he noted, 'this sometimes gets into amusing contradictions between what is two-dimensional and what is three-dimensional'.
This painting's six principal images are an aeroplane, a paw mark, a paddle, a meal table, an explosion and a window. From corner to corner Cohen painted an aeroplane in one set of colours which, while wet, he scraped in numerous directions. He painted the rest of the canvas in a contrasting set of scraped colours. Within the aeroplane's boundaries he then painted an image using the second set of colours, and repeated it (a different size, sometimes inverted, dismembered or as if projected) in the non-aeroplane space, but in the aeroplane colours. This process continued until all spaces were full. Colours were intended to clash as much as possible. The orientation of each image was determined by its having to rest on a scraped line. Here, as in many of Cohen's works, an unpredictable scatter of forms grows as the painting develops. Cohen sees this progression as akin to that of a meal. As a Jew, his experience of the Passover meal gave him a heightened sense, from an early age, that shared meals can have complex meanings. As he has observed, one Passover meal, the Last Supper, was eaten on 'the eve of Chaos'. Here, as in Sienese painting, smaller 'predella' panels amplify a picture's principal image. Cohen was also concerned with the notion of the traces left by the passage of anything across space, land or time. The marks here are literally traces of the delicate stencils, cut by him, through which they were painted. Paddles have no top or bottom; their irregular arrangement here accords with Cohen's decision that the painting may be hung any way up.
Gallery label, August 2004
Jane Shore was a mistress of King Edward IV. After his death in 1483 she was accused of being a harlot and condemned to do public penance in St Pauls Cathedral. The golden glow of this watercolour comes from a very thick, now-yellowed glue layer that was almost certainly applied as a varnish by Blake. He varnished his temperas in a similar way. Once it had yellowed someone else added a picture varnish on top. This also went yellow but has since been removed. The subtle colouring of Blakes painting is suppressed by the glue varnish.
Gallery label, July 2008
Oiticica often worked in series, or bodies of works. The Metaesquema include over 350 small scale paintings on card. These compositions of opaque, monochrome, geometric forms, often in primary colours, were inspired by the abstract art of Piet Mondrian and Kasimir Malevich. In contrast to the rigorous order and structure of both European artists, however, Oiticica introduces elements of instability into his works. The forms appear to jostle and bump together as though they are moving.
Turner began most oil paintings with coloured, transparent washes on a white or slightly warmed offwhite priming, whether on canvas or panel. His watercolour beginnings on white or offwhite paper can be very similar. The washes indicate the key features of the composition, even though they lack the depth and opacity of fully worked-up oil paint. 

There is no preliminary drawing here, nor was it needed. The sky is sufficiently developed to show that the weather is fine, and the warm clouds suggest afternoon.  The bank and the water are suggested only by the cows hooves in the water, and their reflections, yet give the viewer a clear impression of where the still water must be. The trees balance the distribution of the buildings. In a separate session, even years later, Turner could have added people and foreground vegetation to build both a subject and a season into the empty landscape.
Gallery label, July 2008
Nolan was born in Melbourne, Australia in 1917. During the early 1940s he renounced his early abstract style and turned instead to the Australian themes which are central to his subsequent work. His principal subjects are the Australian landscape, and stories deriving from Australian history. A main source of inspiration was the legend of the nineteenth century Australian outlaw and folk hero Ned Kelly. Kelly was the leader of a gang of bank robbers whose daring exploits achieved notoriety. The metal body armour worn by the gang captured popular imagination. This painting relates to the Siege of Glenrowan in 1880, a gunbattle between the gang and police in which Kelly was finally captured.
This informal group portrait was painted for Nathaniel Oldham, to commemorate a dinner party at this home. Oldham came home from hunting so late that the friends he had invited to dinner ate without him. He found them relaxing with a bowl of hot wine. Oldham is shown on the far left. In the centre, holding a pipe, is a neighbouring farmer. His friend, a local school master, holds a blue and white bowl. Between them, wearing a red velvet cap, is Joseph Highmore himself, Oldhams close friend who was commissioned to paint the scene.
In 1953 Louis visited Helen Frankenthaler's studio and was impressed by her experiments with staining the canvas rather than painting on it. He developed this technique in works such as VAV. One of his so-called 'veil' paintings, it was made by pouring very liquid paint down its surface. In applying paint in this way Louis was reacting against Abstract Expressionist painters such as de Kooning and Kline. They had emphasised gestural brushwork as a means of personal expression. By pouring paint, Louis sought to exclude expression because the artist no longer directly controlled the marks which resulted. Also, the stained canvas no longer 'bore' a representative image. Instead it became an object in itself.
The French-Canadian painter Riopelle was one of  the artists included in the 1951 exhibition in  Paris, 'Vhmences Confrontes' (Opposing Forces).  He had been living in Paris since 1947, and  brought to his work both a North American  background and a distinctly European sensibility.  In the early 1950s Riopelle had experimented with  dripping and splashing paint, creating densely  covered canvases in vivid colours. He went on to  develop a distinctive technique using a palette  knife to apply the paint in quick, sharp strokes  all over the canvas. This resulted in a thickly  worked surface, or 'impasto'. This painting was  executed in this way. The marks are suggestive of  the painter's action in applying the paint.
Scott was primarily a painter of marine and river  views, especially of the Thames. The latter were  inspired by those of Canaletto who, like Scott,  was interested in the construction of old  Westminster Bridge. Construction began in 1739,  but Scott's paintings of it were probably done in  1750 just before it was opened to traffic. This  particular oil is one of five versions. Its small  size suggests that it is possibly the first Scott  painted, worked up from pencil studies made on the  spot, to test ideas he had for his much larger and  monumental work. Like Canaletto, Scott has  included a touch of humour: on top of the  balustrade a construction worker is taking a  well-earned break.
While parts of this painting such as the flotsam in the foreground are unfinished, the carefully and solidly modelled clouds are well developed. Turner has realised his theme by depicting a break in the clouds at the centre of the sky, through which a shaft of light illuminates an area of calmer waters and a white sail. However, it is uncertain whether the boat has escaped the storm, or is heading into danger.
Little is known about the subject of this work, but the painting is similar in style and composition to a number of frontal views of the heads of male and female clowns painted by the artist in 1937 and 1938. Rouault rarely painted portraits, preferring instead to use the human figure as a symbol of certain moral qualities or, more generally, to express the sufferings of mankind. The woman in this painting wears modern dress, but the treatment of her head distantly recalls traditional religious pictures, particularly Byzantine icons.
Penrose was a crucial figure in introducing surrealism to Britain. He developed a type of word-and-image portrait in which the poetic and painted elements are mutually enriching. The abstract forms suggest, rather than depict, the subject while the ornate frame exaggerates the unconventional quality. When submitted for the United Artists exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1940, Portrait was rejected because the organisers considered some words offensive (presumably arse). In its place, Penrose submitted a painting of a group of hands, which were later discovered to spell SHIT in sign language.
This was an expensive print at five shillings,  elements of which were later used in the Napoleonic wars for army recruitment posters. Much of this influential image ridicules Catholicism. The  fisherwomen wearing crucifixes on the left seem  to pray to the cheap flat fish in front of them. In the background, through the gate, 'superstitious' locals are kneeling before the Cross, beneath a tavern sign of a dove, symbol of the Holy Ghost, in Hogarth's mockery of the Eucharist. More earthly nourishment, however, comes in the form of the unattainable sirloin of British beef. Hogarth's  contempt for the French should be set against his enormous debt to French art and design, evident  in much of his work.
Gallery label, July 2008
Gallery label, August 2004
This is a preparatory study for the painting of the following year of the same title. The composition is of a nude seen from above and is more open and less dense than was his earlier practice. Lanyon visited New York in the late 1950s and was able to experience the work of the American Abstract Expressionists at first hand. As a result his work became less concerned with literal description than before and his use of line, as can be seen in this drawing, became freer and more gestural.
The large head, short limbs and symmetrical pose of this figure follow African rather than European sculptural conventions. Epstein admired Egyptian, Assyrian and African sculptures which he had seen in the British Museum and himself  built up an important collection of African art. He equated what was seen then as primitive art with a free sexuality and creativity, which he expressed here through the pregnant female form. The term flenite used in the title was invented by Epstein to refer to the flinty hardness of the stone used, actually a material called serpentine.
John Smith (?16551725) was an eminent Whig politician who commanded much respect as a commissioner for arranging the union with Scotland. In 1707 he was re-elected as Speaker of the House of Commons. Kneller shows him in his Speakers robes, the mace and chair behind him, holding a scroll inscribed The Union Act. The composition is one of dignified regularity, the sweep of Smiths robe deliberately following the vertical black lines on the marble floor. German-born, Kneller was the most successful and prolific portraitist of his day. Principal Painter from 1688, he was created a baronet in 1715.
Gallery label, September 2004
Hepworth first began to pierce her carvings in 1931, when she made a 'Pierced Form' in pink alabaster. This process was to become an essential element of many of the artist's later carvings. It represented both a liberation from naturalism, and the freedom of expression granted by abstraction. This abstraction nevertheless remained inspired by the landscape and wildlife about her. Hepworth gained immense pleasure from piercing the stone purely 'to make an abstract form and space: quite a different sensation from that of doing it for the purpose of realism.'
Formed in 1985, the Guerrilla Girls are an anonymous activist group who highlight discrimination in the art world. Their targets include artists, gallerists and cultural institutions. Over the years their attacks on sexism have widened to other areas of social, racial and gender-based inequality.  These posters were fly-posted overnight in the fashionable New York art district of SoHo. The Guerrilla Girls wear gorilla masks for public appearances and use pseudonyms. They continue to produce publicity exposing discrimination, as well as conducting seminars and workshops in schools, colleges and art institutions.
Rouault was a deeply religious artist whose paintings frequently depicted those at the fringes of society, particularly prostitutes and circus performers. He made several paintings of judges which express his skepticism about systems of human justice. If I have made judges such lamentable figures, it is doubtless because I betrayed the anguish which I feel at the sight of a human being who has to pass judgement on other men, he said. The judges themselves I could not condemn.
Fougeron was the leading artist associated with the French Communist Party in the early 1950s. This is a portrait of his wife. By surrounding her with the details of their own modest domestic interior - the loaf and vegetables, the standard tiling and utilitarian sink - he indicates a simple life of material struggle. And by applying the precision of his ''new French realism'' to his own family and home, Fougeron emphasises his role as artist of the people.
This work belongs to a series known as the Sex Pictures, which feature mannequins and body parts obtained from medical catalogues. Sherman has often addressed themes of sexual objectification and the depiction of women in art. However, the focus on male and female genitalia, sexual display and coupling in this series is far more ambiguous. They can be seen as theatrical representations of pornography. Although voyeuristic and dysfunctional, their erotic content is deliberately undermined.
Between 1933 and 1936 several artists later associated with the Euston Road School produced almost or totally abstract paintings executed in a free painterly manner. Along with Tibble and Graham Bell, Moynihan produced the most abstract of these. This example is from Objective Abstraction's middle phase, when definite marks and longer strokes had given way to denser textures. In his words: 'the gradual thickening of the paint was ... a kind of build-up as a result of correction and suggestion'. He was 'continually aware of the lung movement of paint, its ability to breathe and move upon the surface of the canvas'.
This picture exemplifies Nicholson's recurrent  practice of using contrasting areas of flat,  vibrant colour with a pale ground that has been  scrubbed and distressed. The bright patches of red  and yellow act as focus points, and perhaps  bring to mind late landscapes by J.M.W. Turner,  such as those in the next room, which are  similarly 'centred' by bright points of the same  colours. But Nicholson would primarily have had in  mind the grid-like abstracts of Mondrian, whom he  greatly admired. There is a  remarkable consistency in the way that Nicholson  formulated his abstract designs, from his first  such exercises in the 1920s (such as the picture  displayed elsewhere in this room)though to the  1950s and '60s.
This picture exemplifies Nicholson's recurrent  practice of using contrasting areas of flat,  vibrant colour with a pale ground that has been  scrubbed and distressed. The bright patches of red  and yellow act as focus points, and perhaps  bring to mind late landscapes by J.M.W. Turner,  such as those in the next room, which are  similarly 'centred' by bright points of the same  colours. But Nicholson would primarily have had in  mind the grid-like abstracts of Mondrian, whom he  greatly admired. There is a  remarkable consistency in the way that Nicholson  formulated his abstract designs, from his first  such exercises in the 1920s (such as the picture  displayed elsewhere in this room)though to the  1950s and '60s.
O'Conor grew up in Dublin, where he went to the Metropolitan School of Art. By 1888 he had moved to Paris, and was associated with the American painters also studying there. Like them he visited Grez-sur-Loing to paint, and later went to Brittany for several summers.
Venice, rich in literary and historical associations, was a popular subject in the 19th century. Here, boats take revellers to one of the citys infamous masquerade balls as the sun sets and the moon rises. Despite spending just under four weeks in the City of Water, Turner found great inspiration there: from 183346 Venetian scenes accounted for a third of his output. This work, with its pair, was his last painting of Venice. It was in Turners studio at the time of his death in 1851, and came to Tate as part of the Turner Bequest.
Lucia Moholy moved to Dessau to accompany her husband Lszl Moholy-Nagy (18951946) when he began teaching at the Bauhaus school of art, architecture and design. There she produced many iconic photographs documenting the architecture of the Bauhaus buildings in the mid-1920s.
After relocating to London from Karachi, Pakistan, in 1964, Araeen was struck by the work of the British sculptor Anthony Caro and decided to devote himself full-time to sculpture. Rather than following Caros example of a compositionally driven practice, Araeen decided that symmetrical configuration should form the basis of a new kind of sculpture. Formally Rang Baranga resembles the structures of Sol Lewitts open minimalist sculptures, but unlike the American artists, Araeens forms incorporate diagonal and orthogonal elements which refer in part to Islamic art but more importantly point to his training and practice as an engineer.
Heron was very concerned with the formal qualities of a painting. He judged a works success by such qualities as the flatness of its composition and the relationship between its forms and the edges of the canvas. Here different blocks of colour appear to float. By setting those blocks within a surrounding field of yellow, he set himself the challenge of using colour, the soft edges of the blocks and their relationship to the frame to resist the illusion of space that might result.
Gallery label, August 2004
The French artist Csar was a founder member in  1960 of the Nouveaux Ralistes group. Their aim  was to engage directly with reality, transforming  their material but fully retaining its identity.  Before joining the group, Csar had already begun  making sculptures from car bodies compressed into  dense packages. In 1968 he visited London to give  a sculpture-making demonstration, sponsored by the  Friends of the Tate Gallery. While here, he  visited a scrap metal merchant and asked that a  number of standard compressions of wheel hubs be  prepared for his inspection. This work was created  by his selecting three from the forty or fifty  made, and arranging them into the specific  configurations seen here.
Sands was a great friend of the painter Walter Sickert, despite the fact that he was inclined to exclude women from the development of modern art.  This painting suggests that Sands was not fooled by her colleague's self-importance.  Sickerts demeanour - and the view-point taken by the artist - encourage the viewer to appraise the scene with the same shrewd humour as the artist herself.
Describing his technique, Appel said: I slap at the paint with brushes and palette knives and my bare hands. The outlines of two dancing figures can barely be deciphered amidst the explosion of line and colour. Following the end of CoBrA, Appels method of working became increasingly aggressive and exuberant as he relished the material quality of the paint. Here, the encrusted surface has a life force of its own which seems to mirror the dynamic exchange between the dancers.
Mail coaches for the north, having started early in the evening from inns in the City of London, are seen here outside the Angel Inn, Islington, where they made their first stop to pick up more passengers. On the left a coach for Liverpool is already underway again. Behind it on the right an orange-seller offers fruit to the occupants of the Manchester coach.
In this innovative portrait Hogarth has applied the paint in thick broad strokes which accentuate the folds in the draperies and serve to heighten the sculptural aspect of the work.  The white lace ruffles on the bodice appear to stand proud from the dress as an independent feature, forming an s curve around the pink floral bow.  This device may well be an early attempt by Hogarth to give visual form to his so-called Line of Beauty and Grace, a serpentine curve which Hogarth perceived as the basis for the most beautiful forms to be found in art and nature.
This painting shows the high point of the first part of Richardsons novel. Having failed in his attempts to seduce Pamela, Mr B sees the error of his ways and becomes a reformed man. The couple marry in secret in Mr Bs private chapel. On Pamelas left is her humble but dignified father, who gives her away. In the background, behind Mr B, is the housekeeper Mrs Jewkes, now also a reformed character. She grasps a bottle of smelling salts in case she is overwhelmed with emotion.
This poem is a contrast to 'Infant Joy' from 'Songs of Innocence'. The child is a person. Accompanied by pain and tears he is born into a dangerous world, though the trappings of comfort and prosperity around his bed belie this. Even in his first natural state of naked helplessness the child conceals what parents and others would regard as an evil spirit ('fiend'). The pressures of conformity ('my swaddling bands') will release this spirit in 'struggling' and 'striving against'. The act of sulking on his mother's breast suggests only a brief respite before the 'fiend' (properly, the child's true individuality) finally asserts itself in adulthood.
During the Second World War, Bomberg worked on paintings of a Bomb Store and made studies of flowers. After the war he returned to the theme of landscape, firstly on painting expeditions to North Devon and Cornwall in 1946 and 1947 respectively, and then in Cyprus in the summer of 1948. In Cyprus Bomberg was inspired by the bright Mediterranean light and produced a series of 'fiery' landscapes. These Cyprus paintings are composed of loose, fluid brushstrokes which are almost abstract in their handling. Paradoxically they serve to emphasise the sense of the forms of the topography with a great intensity.
Soto left Venezuela for Paris in 1950 where, influenced by Piet Mondrians late works, he set out to make paintings that appeared to move. His interest in the transformation of matter into energy led him to create a series of reliefs he called vibrations. In these works, layers of lines, either static or mobile, produce an optical disturbance. In Cardinal a cascade of stems hangs in front of a striped background, gently swinging with the air around it. This movement is enhanced by the optical effects of the rods against the hand-drawn lines.
By the mid-1950s Moore had almost entirely eliminated drawing from his creative process and explored his ideas through small maquettes. These had an intrinsic quality of immediacy or spontaneity and allowed him to imagine the finished product in the round. In order to translate the scale of the work more effectively, he often made larger working models as an intermediate stage between the maquette and the finished sculpture. Moores maquettes were typically cast in bronze in editions of up to ten. The sculptor strove for monumentality in his work and tried to imbue the same quality in the small maquettes. He also took a great deal of care with their finish. Some were more polished than others, some darker, some greener. Moore did all the patination himself, treating the bronze with different acids to achieve different effects then working on it by hand, rubbing and wearing it down.
Pasmore was successful as both a figurative and an abstract artist. This view of the back gardens from his Hammersmith studio is one of a series of 1940s London landscapes that brought his figurative period to an end. It shows him blurring the boundaries between naturalism and abstraction. Tate's collection of works by Pasmore charts every phase in his career. He was described by the art historian Kenneth Clark as 'one of the two or three most talented English painters' of the twentieth century.
This painting belongs to the 'Open' series which Motherwell commenced in 1967. The inspiration for the series came about accidentally. While working in his studio Motherwell was struck by the shapes resulting from the back of a small painting leaning against the painted surface of a larger one. By outlining the smaller painting in charcoal he was able to suggest an opening at the bottom of the canvas. He inverted subsequent compositions so that a painted rectangle appeared at the top. For Motherwell, 'abstract art is a form of mysticism'. Thus his colours are associated with particular emotions and the rectangular form suggests a gateway or enclosure within a metaphysical space.
Between 1911 and 1913 Lewis experimented with Cubism. However, when he later recalled the process by which he made this work, he used language similar to that used by the artist Wassily Kandinsky. He wrote 'The way those things were done...is that a mental-emotive impulse is let loose upon a lot of blocks and lines of various dimensions, and encouraged to push them around and to arrange them as it will.' Kandinsky exhibited in London during the years 1909-13. His abstract style must have appealed to avant-garde artists such as Lewis.
Gallery label, December 2004
Painter and film-maker Wilhelm Sasnal uses photographs as a starting point for his work. Whether finding them by chance or seeking them out on the internet, he selects images he sees as open to interpretation. His three paintings based on broadcast coverage of the killing of Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi  made the same year  demonstrate how painterly concerns such as scale, technique and composition transform our relation to the image. Here Sasnal depicts the body of the deposed leader as an abstract mass of thickly applied paint to imply a visceral and violent death.
An alternative to the conventional structure of canvas stretched across a wooden backing frame is proposed here. A grid of aluminium tubes are used as the support instead, and the work is suspended on the wall by strips of painted tape that also run diagonally across the canvas, twisting at the bottom and edges to reveal their painted underside. While still holding on to the category of painting, the work draws attention to its presence as a physical object, not just a two-dimensional image.
This painting combines portraits of individuals with mythological characters. 

The figure to the left could be the god Pan but also displays some of the attributes of a satyr - goats legs, horns and horses ears. In either case, he would represent the theme of lust. The boy, who is painted as an individual, is presumably a family member, dressed up as Cupid, the god of love. We are left to work out the story, and what this might say about the status of the female sitter to the right.
Posenenske was interested in industrial methods of production, and produced free standing sculptures which often resemble standardised architectural units. Square Tubes Series D, consists of a number of folded, hollow elements which are joined together to create different shaped pieces, according to the owners decision. The tubes can be hung or placed on the floor in numerous configurations, and the physical organisation of the elements can be altered each time they are exhibited
In this work Nicholson suggests depth and  overlapping planes in a more complex way than  in his pre-war abstract reliefs, carving into the  hardboard and working colour into the surface during the carving process, to give a subtle  differentiation of tone and texture. In 1958 Nicholson moved from Cornwall to the Ticino in Switzerland and his work expanded in scale and showed a greater freedom of colour and texture, perhaps in response to the grandeur of the  landscape which he described as 'entirely magical with the kind of visual poetry I would like to find in my paintings.'
Hamilton spent much of his life in Rome. His paintings from ancient history, painted there in the 1760s and widely known through prints, were highly influential. The most famous were six subjects from Homer's 'Iliad' of which this, commissioned by Lord Mountjoy and engraved in 1775, was the fifth. Priam, King of Troy, prostrates himself before Achilles to plead for the body of Hector, which Achilles has desecrated in furious revenge for the death of his friend Patroclus; Achilles begins to yield to compassion. The frieze-like composition is derived from Roman sarcophagus sculpture, and the heroic figures, with their emphatic gestures and expressions, from Poussin, whose paintings Hamilton admired.
Nebots view of Covent Garden looks west towards St Pauls Church. It records the activities and architecture of Covent Garden which, by the 1730s, was at the heart of Londons artistic community. It was a popular urban subject, also painted by Samuel Scott, among others. The market was first developed in the 1650s. Twenty years later the Earl of Bedford was given permission to hold forever a market in the Piazza on every day in the year except Sundays and Christmas Day for the buying and selling of all manner of fruit, flowers, roots and herbs.
A regular theme in Blackadder's work during the 1960s was the still life. Some favourite domestic objects appeared several times, such as a dark coffee pot, small painted boxes, patterned cloths and richly coloured oriental rugs bought on her travels. These are laid out in compositions full of spatial ambiguity. Blackadder chose the objects for their colour and shape but equally they have a special personal meaning for her. She is fascinated by exotic plants and fruits and especially pomegranates 'which as well as being visually exciting with their jewel-like seeds always seemed to me to be particularly poetic with mythic connections.'This painting was chosen by Maureen Duffy.
The Old In Out is one of several resin toilet bowls cast in a urine-coloured yellow by Lucas. It operates as a visual pun, blending lavatorial humour with vulgar sexual connotations. The title is London street slang for a burglary, but also makes reference to sex. 'Generally I've used old toilets for their grubby value. It was nice to make ones that look quite smart - like antidotes. I like the idea of something uncouth being elegant,' says Lucas. It can also be seen as a salute to Marcel Duchamp's famous Fountain, which he made by up-turning a urinal and declaring it a work of art.
Marini produced his first equestrian works in the mid 1930s. He was inspired to do so by seeing sculptures of medieval knights on horseback in Germany. The subject symbolised for him a primeval or mythical harmony between man and nature. After the Second World War, however, his figures on horses often expressed anguish. This related to Marini's experience of seeing Italian peasants on frightened horses fleeing bombardment during the War. The artist wrote that this sculpture was 'the result of a sad period which Italy passed through during the War', and described it as 'enclosed in geometrical lines', and 'very precise in its tragic and human significance'.
From the age of fifteen Hambling studied with the  painters Cedric Morris and Arthur Lett Haines at  their private art school, Benton End, in Suffolk.  Her first London exhibition in 1973 included  portraits of people observed in pubs and painted  from memory. This portrait is an extremely  significant work in Hambling's oeuvre as it marks  the beginning of her return to drawing and  painting from life, a discipline she was taught at  Benton End. Frances Rose was a widow in her early  eighties who was Hambling's next-door neighbour in  Battersea, and who greatly enjoyed sitting for her  portrait.
Sickert first visited Venice in 1895. He painted  St Mark's basilica several times under different  conditions, possibly inspired by Monet's paintings  of Rouen Cathedral, which he had seen in Paris.  However, unlike Monet, he was not concerned with  fleeting effects of light. Instead, he  concentrated on the structure and mosaics, using  the light to accentuate the sparkling gold  pinnacles and to emphasise the spirituality of the  basilica. This is Sickert's largest and most  elaborate depiction of the front elevation. The  title includes the Latin motto of the city: 'Peace  be unto to you, Mark, my Evangelist'. The picture  was first exhibited at the New English Art Club in  1897.
A strand of Dada production was associated with an ironic and subversive view of science. 
Jean Crotti and Suzanne Duchamp infused much of their work with this attitude, which brought them close to Marcel Duchamp and Francis Picabia. Crottis Portrait of Edison may both celebrate and subvert the reputation of Thomas Edison, the great inventor associated with electric lights, telephones and recording. The phonograph especially seems to be deconstructed in the lower part of the composition.
Hepworth, like Moore, was born and brought up in Yorkshire. They both attended Leeds School of Art and then the Royal College of Art in London. In the late 1920s Hepworth and Moore continued the tradition of direct carving, as opposed to modelling, and were drawn to 'primitive' art forms. But in the 1930s Hepworth looked more towards European abstract and Surrealist models. 'Seated Figure' still retains vestiges of primitivism, but displays a growing interest in abstract organic forms. Hepworth, like Moore was concerned to be truthful to her materials: The sculpture is suggestive of a tree trunk from which the form is released.
The mysterious effects of moonlight 

are effectively suggested here by the 

use of mezzotint. This technique differs from etching and engraving. Rather than working from light to dark by cutting lines, the mezzotinter burnishes away a rough burr on the plate where the light areas 

are required. Strong contrasts of light and shade can be beautifully rendered using this method of printmaking.
One of the leading traditional painters of his generation, Munnings was best known for his horse paintings. This depicts George V and Queen Mary, with the future kings Edward VIII and George VI, returning to Windsor Castle after attending Ascot races. Munnings became a Royal Academician in 1925, and recalled that he wished to make an ambitious effort: this ten-footer, as he called it, was the result. Munnings consciously invited comparison with earlier British artists, not least with Constables six-footers. This picture was painted partly out of doors, with the horses and the carriage done from life.
The last of Turners whaling paintings shows the boiling of blubber for processing into oil. The creature laid out on the ice at the right of the picture may have been based on a whale caught in the Thames in 1842, as well as on images by other artists.

As the title makes clear, the success of the whalers is threatened by the frozen water. A reference to this incident is made in the companion to this painting which shows the Erebus, a boat the Admiralty had promised, but failed, to send to rescue ships trapped in the ice.
A Canadian, Elizabeth Forbes studied in London, New York, Munich and Brittany and was inspired by Impressionism to paint everyday scenes outdoors. She became a leading member of the Newlyn School in Cornwall and co-founded the Newlyn Art School. Her international success made her a role model for other women artists: I am at Mrs Forbes feet - she wins one with her strength of colour and design, wrote Frances Hodgkins in 1902.
Grant went to art school in Paris in 1907, and knew both Matisse and Picasso. Like them he was interested in African sculpture. This interest is echoed here in the figures broad hips, tapering legs, flattened round breasts and the simple suggestion of her ribs as well as the hatched patterning of the background.Grant would also have known the writings on African art by Roger Fry, a fellow member of the Bloomsbury Group. Fry argued that what was commonly seen as primitive art possessed a raw, erotic passion that had been lost in traditional western painting.
This sculpture was enlarged from a smaller  version, part of which, the 'thin neck' of the  title, was inspired by the breast bone of a bird.  Moore wrote 'Since my student days I have liked  the shape of bones and have drawn them, studied  them in the Natural History Museum, found them on  seashores and saved them out of the stewpot. There  are many structural and sculptural principles to  be learnt from bones, e.g. that inspite of their  lightness they have great strength'. Moore stated  that the thin head and neck in this work 'by  contrast with the width and bulk of the body, give  more monumentality to the work.'
Gallery label, September 2004
Gill was one of several sculptors in Britain and abroad who pioneered the revival of the traditional skill of carving in wood and stone. Like many modern artists, he drew inspiration from what was then seen as primitive art. This included non-western carvings and ancient and Medieval European art. This work can be related to medieval English carvings and to the work of Paul Gauguin, which was itself influenced by African and Polynesian art.
Rivera was a Mexican painter, noted especially for his large mural paintings made from the 1920s onward. He lived in Paris most of the previous decade and painted in a cubist style between 1913 and 1917. The objects here include a flask, a wine glass, a soda syphon and a tin or container of Charter Oak Milk on a table. The artist has included his own signature and the date of the painting (DR/anno 16) on the milk label.
The long terrace along Petworths west front is shown curving upwards to left and right in a fish-eye lens perspective effect emphasised by the clouds seeming to arch downwards on each side of the setting sun. Lord Egremonts dogs dash from his chair past the unconcerned deer to greet him. This incident was left out of the finished version installed at Petworth in favour of a cricket match in the park, one of the entertainments the benevolent Egremont liked to hold for the local people.
Minton was invalided out of the army in 1943, and  from then until autumn 1946 he shared a London  studio with two other painters, Robert Colquhoun  and Robert MacBryde. The Polish painter Jankel  Adler also lived in the same house and he shared  with the younger painters his knowledge of the  European avant-garde, especially Picasso. The  landscape in this painting is inspired by disused  buildings seen near the sea at Marazion in  Cornwall, but the children are probably invented  figures. The subject of the painting may suggest  an interest in child psychology and awakening  sexuality, themes found in other work by Minton in  the mid-1940s.
Gallery label, October 2000
This was made shortly after Pasmore's first abstract collage, during a transitional phase in his career. The structures and patterns, shapes and colours of his landscape - inspired paintings had evolved into a formal vocabulary, and Pasmore began to work in a more abstract manner. While he was also making paintings based on square or spiral forms, a major line of investigation during this time was collage in the Cubist manner, which he developed between 1949-53. Here he used scraps of coloured paper and newsprint to give a new reality, that is an anti-illusionistic content, to his compositions.
The Earls Court Exhibition of 1887 was the first of four, devoted in turn to America, Italy, France and Germany. The Alps were the painted backdrop to the display about America which owed much of its success to Colonel Codys (Buffalo Bill) Wild West Show. Steers use of sombre colours and decorative surface pattern echoes the work of Whistler and Japanese prints. In the following year he began to adopt the style and technique of the French impressionists, and painted a series of beach scenes in luminous colours.
Gallery label, August 2004
Gallery label, February 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
Oppenheim spread 1,000 pounds of salt into a 50 x 100 foot rectangle in a parking lot in New York. This work includes a map showing the location of the site, and a photograph of the salt in position. Oppenheim intended to place salt blocks of identical weight on the ocean bed off the Bahamas, and along the surface of the Salt Lake desert in Utah. In each context, the salt would undergo change, whether spreading out, disintegrating in water, or becoming incorporated into a solid salt surface. These later actions were never carried out.
This is an illustration to chapter 42, verses 13-15 of the Book of Job. The main title comes from verse 15. The names of Job's daughters were Jemima, Kezia and Kerenhappuch. They are all seen against a background which depicts some of the trials Job has passed through. On the left is the destruction of his servants by the Chaldeans, described in Job, chapter 1, verse 17. On the right is the destruction of Job's ploughmen, described in chapter 1, verses 14-15. Behind Job's head God appears in the whirlwind. Blake treated this subject in his Job series and the print is shown nearby.
The upper part is unfinished, having only transparent washes in thinned oil paint. Turners design developments are all in the lower portion, including a group of people around the piano, coffin or altar to the right, sketchily represented and later painted over.  Near the centre, he applied emerald green and bright red vermilion in a resin-rich paint that cracked as it dried, to give a strong colour contrast. Emerald green was the first intensely green pigment Turner could obtain, and had not long been available. Previous generations and many of his own circle mixed greens from blue and yellow, to give less intense and more harmonious shades. 

The dazzling light was created by using a palette knife, a brush, the brush-end, scratches from Turners thumb-nail (kept long for this purpose), and light blue paint to contrast with the yellow.  This contrast is now muted by yellowed varnish, which suppresses blue tones.
All of LeWitt's work embraces some kind of system. Here, he uses the frame of a cube to generate a series of geometric shapes. This sequence shows five shapes, but the possible permutations that could be drawn out of a cube are almost limitless. The prints are not made by LeWitt, but by assistants according to his instructions. By minimising his physical presence in the process of fabrication, LeWitt emphasises the importance of the concept behind the work. 'The idea becomes a machine that makes the art', he has said.
Gallery label, September 2004
The subject of this painting is an oblique view of the Riva degli Schiavoni, the principal waterfront in Venice. On the left is the Doges Palace with the Campanile of San Marco behind, and on the right is the white dome and bell tower of the church of San Zaccaria. The quay in the foreground is crowded with boats, their vertical masts punctuating the long stretch of promenade beyond. Like many of Turners images of Venice, the picture is characterised by the haziness of its forms, and it is difficult to say where the land ends and the water begins.
Cindy Shermans Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artists earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
As well as portraits, still lifes and landscapes, Corinth painted many mythological and religious subjects throughout his career. This work is closely based on an episode in Flaubert's book of the same title, in which St Anthony is tempted by the Queen of Sheba. She appears before him with a train of exotic attendants, including an elephant, camels and women astride piebald horses. Professional models posed for Corinth, including a wrestler for the figure of St Anthony. Corinth frequently painted several versions of his subjects, often years apart. His first version of this theme was painted in 1897 and is more conventional, depicting an aged hermit tormented by naked women.
Fontana is best known for his claim to have introduced elements of time and space into art by slashing the canvas with a razor blade. He also explored other styles and in these and in many statements and manifestos he published Fontana strove to originate new forms of art appropriate to the modern scientific age. Although not slashed this canvas is perforated in places. It is one of the last and largest of a series of 'gessi' or chalks, made between 1954 and 1958. Fontana has written that it 'was painted in an attempt to develop the means of art so as to achieve a contemporary expression'.
This work was suggested to the artist by a row of buckets he saw outside an ironmonger?s shop, one of which had rain water in it. He bought some buckets, taps and tubing which he then covered in chrome. Barker said that at the time he was inspired by the American commercial practice of carefully arranging ordinary domestic objects in shop displays as  if they were expensive.
Gary Hume often works from photographs, and reduces his subjects to simple areas of flat colour. This print is from a series of portraits that were based on paintings Hume made between 1994 and 1998. Screen printing is a medium ideally suited to Humes imagery as it involves building up solid areas of colour. The prints in this series were made using several layers of varnish which results in a sheer, glossy surface.
Sisley moved from Svres to Veneux-Nadon, on the outskirts of Moret-sur-Loing, in 1880, and stayed for the next two years. The painting depicts a view of a riverside path between Veneux and By. Sisley painted several other pictures at this time along this path or very close to it.
Gallery label, August 2004
This sketchbook augments the studies Turner made  in the Louvre in 1802, when he had omitted Claude  from his survey of favoured artists. Two of the  three designs on this page are copied from  pictures by Claude: *Seaport with the Landing of  Cleopatra in Tarsus* (middle) and *Landscape, with  Samuel Anointing David* (bottom). At the top of  the page he has copied Poussin's *Landscape,  with Diogenes*, a picture he had also admired  twenty years earlier. On the other side of the  page opening he plays with the composition of the  painting of Samuel and David, merging its details  with a view of the surburb of St-Cloud to the west  of Paris. The book also contains many closely  observed studies of the architecture of Rouen.
Like Lead White, Ivory Black explores questions of race and gender, subverting male traditions of looking at and representing the female body. The paradoxical titles of both paintings are taken from the names of oil paints, implying that the division between black and white is not as clear as the proponents of apartheid believed. The young black woman in Ivory Black wears a diaphanous white garment that seems to simultaneously veil and reveal her body. With her arms held tightly to her sides, she is an ambiguous figure, both guarded and exposed, empowered and captive.
Framptons painting depicts a young soldier and his companion kneeling to pray at a wayside shrine before he goes off to war. He wears the uniform of a private in the French infantry. The background of the picture depicts a section of the Breton coastal landscape at Camaret-sur-Mer where the artist had spent some time in 1911. Painted in 1920, the work looks back to a moment of innocent patriotism, but is infused with the subsequent knowledge of the horrific loss of life in the First World War.
Gallery label, September 2004
King was one of a number of sculptors who first gained recognition under the label New Generation, a title derived from an exhibition at the Whitechapel Gallery in 1965.These artists used bright colours and new materials, such as plastic and fibreglass to make sculpture that defied established conventions. Solidity and weightiness gave way to light, open and witty pieces such as this.
These collages are mainly made from magazines given to Paolozzi by American ex-servicemen. They show his fascination with popular culture and technology, as well as with the glamour of American consumerism. The title of the series refers to Henry Ford's    famous statement that;History is more or less bunk;. We want 

to live in the present; It reflects  Paolozzi's belief 

that his work should respond to contemporary culture.
Gallery label, September 2004
Carl Milles was the first non-British artist to be given an exhibition at the Tate Gallery. Milles was a Swedish-born sculptor who was best known in his day for public sculpture and large monuments. His traditional subject matter and classical style seem barely touched by the radical developments in modern sculpture which were happening around him. It may be for this reason that he was considered a suitable, if conservative, choice for an exhibition at the Tate Gallery in 1927. Europa and the Bull was on display in this exhibition and was bought by the gallery soon afterwards (see archive records in display case).
Gallery label, September 2004
The Nile was a famous and crucial British victory (1798) during the French Revolutionary Wars. Nelson found the French fleet at anchor near Alexandria and attacked at night. The climax of the battle came when the French flagship exploded, the dramatic moment portrayed here. Crucially the victory secured British control of the Mediterranean and made a national hero of Nelson. The central image of the burning remnants of the ship echoes the erupting volcano in de Loutherbourgs Vesuvius (displayed nearby). Both deal with the destructive power of nature: the broader devastation and the unseen agonising death of the individual
Although Reynolds has worked in a completely abstract style since 1960, he initially built his  reputation as a landscape painter. Summer  was painted between the end of August and  the last week of September 1954 and is one  of four works on the theme of the Seasons painted by Reynolds that year. Spring is in the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, Australia and Winter is in the Fleischmann Collection, Pittsburgh, U.S.A. Autumn is in a private collection in Britain.
Until the First World War (1914-1918) military service was still perceived as a noble and useful profession for the British aristocracy, who functioned as guardians of the British Empire. General Sir Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton (1853-1947) is portrayed as Colonel and Commander of the 3rd Brigade of the Tirah Expeditionary Force on the N.W. Frontier of India. He broke his leg before the campaign and was in fact unable to take part in the Battle of Dargai of 1897, rejoining his command only after the fighting had ceased. But like other portraits of this type, the picture does not represent a moment in the sitter's life. Instead, it is an emblematic image celebrating the sitter's achievements and social status.
When McTaggart finished his training at the Trustees Academy in Edinburgh, he practised as a portrait painter with a minutely realistic technique. He became more interested in painting figures in landscape, and by the 1880s his handling of paint was much broader. He painted the sea and coastline, in works that are reminiscent of Courbet. The series of emigrants that he painted combine these interests with a subject of serious social concern in Scotland, the emigration of people from the West Coast to live in Canada and Australia. McTaggart had first-hand experience of such emigration in his own family.
Although originally untitled, this work has become known as Ben Nevis Hitch-Hike. In April 1967, Richard Long walked and hitch-hiked from London to the summit of Ben Nevis and back. The journey took six days, and at 11am each day he took two photographs. For one photograph he pointed the camera straight up, and for the other he pointed it straight down. The photographs which appear in the work are the only ones taken on the journey.
This is the artist's last self-portrait, executed  in his Paris apartment in the Place Dauphine,  overlooking the Pont Neuf. It is painted with the  dabbing brushstroke that was typical of the work  of this Impressionist artist. Pissarro was a  modest and self-critical man, but had strongly  held artistic and political beliefs which  influenced many younger artists. Something of his  air of personal authority can perhaps be sensed in  this portrait. Towards the end of his life  Pissarro began to enjoy financial security, and,  indeed, received official recognition in 1903, the  year in which he executed this painting, when two  of his works were bought by the Louvre.
Leonilsons earlier works were mainly colourful figurative paintings inspired by the Italian transavanguardia movement, though he also admired Lygia Clarks and Hlio Oiticicas textile experiments. By 1991, weakened by ill-health, he was working exclusively with fabric. In the original Portuguese title, O Penlope, Leonilson paired a masculine article with a feminine name to subvert gender boundaries and challenge needleworks traditionally female associations. The embroidered words, SECRET  SILENCE  SENTINEL  THE PENELOPE, evoke the tension and isolation felt by someone coping with AIDS through reference to a Classical story of deferral and hope.
Turner was as much a marine painter as a landscape artist; this is one of his history paintings set at sea. In 1807 he went to Portsmouth to see the arrival of two captured Danish ships and make sketches upon which this painting was based. The original title (as above) referred to this event. 
By the time the work was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1809, political outcry against the operation was such that he felt it advisable to change the title to Boats crew recovering an anchor.
Gallery label, September 2004
The boy in this portrait was Gainsborough's  nephew, the son of his youngest sister, Susanna  Gardiner. A late nineteenth-century source tells  us that Gardiner 'was constantly in and out of the  studio as a boy of twelve'. He is shown here in  'Van Dyck' costume, a fancy dress version of  Cavalier attire which it was then fashionable for  portrait sitters to wear. It is the same costume,  in fact, that was worn by Jonathan Buttall in  Gainsborough's famous full-length portrait known  as the 'Blue Boy' (Huntington Art Gallery, San  Marino, California). It is thought that the artist  painted this portrait of Richard Gardiner 'as a  trial of colour' before attempting the 'Blue Boy'.
Gallery label, February 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, September 2004
This is the only known oil painting by the illustrator Aubrey Beardsley and was painted in the studio of Walter Sickert. It comprises two pictures on one canvas. Caprice, in which a woman is invited through a doorway by a dwarf, and on the back, Woman with a White Mouse. Both are ambiguous scenes that appear to represent carnival. Caprice derives from the drawing Comedy Ballet of Marionettes I which appeared in the Yellow Book in 1894. Like Beardsleys drawings, Caprice simplifies shape and colour to strengthen the effect.
Burens work is concerned with the relationship between the artwork and its surroundings. I have always tried to show that indeed a thing never exists in itself, he has said. One of the Possibilities is a sixteen metre-long piece of blue and white striped cloth, which can be installed in different ways, depending on the size, shape and layout of the room. The appearance of the artwork is therefore never fixed, but will always change according to its location.
Davies's 'William Jeffrey with Device', also in this display, was cast from life. However, 'Dogman' was originally modelled by the artist in clay. A plaster mould was then made, and from this the head was cast in fibreglass and painted. Both sculptures incorporate what Davies calls a 'device'. Here, this takes the form of a dog-like muzzle which was modelled onto the features of the head. Glass eyes complete the illusion of reality, despite this bizarre appendage. The viewer is thus presented with a paradox: a head which appears both naturalistic and simultaneously fantastic. Davies exploits this disturbing ambiguity to amplify the physical presence of this 'portrait'.
Gallery label, September 2004
The mother and child had been a major theme in Moore's work since the 1920s. Yet when the vicar of the Church of 

St Matthew, Northampton, invited Moore to make a sculpture of the Madonna and Child for the church, he was reluctant 

to accept. He felt unsure how to adapt his secular interests to the Christian tradition.
In February 1942 Bomberg gained a commission from the War Artists Advisory Committee to execute a painting showing the activities in one of the underground bomb stores constructed at sites around Britain. He was granted access to one at Burton-on-Trent and the ominous setting fired his imagination. Bomberg made numerous drawings and sketches, and three oil paintings, of which this is one. Although the bomb store series is now regarded as a high point in Bombergs career, at the time the War Artists Advisory Committee selection panel considered the works too innovative and accepted only three drawings.
Like Construction in Space: Diagonal, this work was found in pieces in Gabo's attic, though the four feet were missing. The project was made  into a full-scale fountain, presumably with curved, rotating arms. Originally sited in a Dresden garden, it is now destroyed.
The Mountains of the Moab lie to the south east of the Dead sea in Jordan. Sargent painted this work in 1905, during a visit to Syria and Palestine, sparked by a commission to paint murals at the Boston Public Library on the theme of The Triumph of Religion. Sargent wanted to give his work greater authenticity by recording first-hand the people and terrain which many Europeans believed had remained unchanged since the life of Christ. Sargent was known primarily as a portrait painter; this was his first exhibited landscape, shown in 1906.
Arthur Melville travelled to Venice in 1894. The city had long been a favourite subject for painters, but Melville found something new. The Blue Night shows St Marks Basilica, the Doges Palace and the Campanile dissolving into the dusk.
Gallery label, September 2004
Hodgkin studied art in London at the Byam Shaw and  Royal Academy schools. Turnips were one of several  types of small natural object that he frequently  painted. Most of his other still life paintings  were made in tempera. As was the artist's custom,  'Pink and White Turnips' was painted directly from  the motif, and the vegetables are depicted their  actual size. According to the artist it probably  took three or four sessions, of perhaps four to  five hours each, to complete the picture.
Lanyon began making constructions in 1939, when he was working in Gabo's studio in Carbis Bay, Cornwall. He acknowledged Gabo as the biggest inspiration for his sculpture, as the title 'Construction' recalls. Between 1946 and 1947 he made five objects, although four of these were later destroyed. Lanyon's widow recalls that he was always putting together and taking apart works of this kind. Though still constructed, Lanyon's sculpture of the 1950s was more painterly in character. He described these later works as 'experiments in space to establish the illusion and the content of space in painting'.
This pictures illustrates the line from the Book  of Isiah inscribed on the frame. Stanhope worked  alongside Burne-Jones in the Oxford Union building  during the project to dcorate its walls with  scenes from the 'Morte d'Arthur'. Burne-Jones  later reflected 'His colour was beyond any the  finest in Europe; an exceptional turn for  landscape he had too - quite individual. Rossetti  was in a perfect state of enthusiasm about it -  that was how he got to know him'.
Aiming to blend into the crowd as much as possible, Zmijewski and his cameramen filmed a series of politically charged gatherings, including demonstrations, military parades and memorial services. Many of the events are extreme right-wing and nationalistic, reflecting what the artist sees as a general cultural shift in Europe. I was less interested in the rightness or justice of the cause, Zmijewski has said, but more in this inner drive that moves people to debate, to publicly show their own needs, demands, requests, opinions  and to defend them with their own presence.
Sickert visited Venice several times between  1895 and 1904. He was becoming interested  in close-up views and in capturing the solid masses and the rhythm of architecture. This  picture confounds our expectations by showing only a portion of the great domed church of  Santa Maria della Salute, giving equal space  to the more severe lines of the building to the  left. He described his working method in Venice  as striving 'to see the thing all at once. To work open and loose, freely, with a full brush and full colour. And to understand that when, with that  full colour, the drawing has been got, the picture  is done.'
Spoleto is a picturesque town in Umbria, famous for its Ponte delle Torri (Bridge of Towers), a medieval feat of engineering which spans the deep gorge to the east. Turner passed through the town on his way to Rome in 1819. As in so many of his Italian-inspired oils, he has enhanced real topography with an evocative but imagined sense of atmosphere. The composition is reworked from an earlier image known as Bridge and Goats. That etching was published in 1812 as part of the Liber Studiorum, a series of prints summing up Turners achievements in landscape to date.
Sadler was well known for his humorous scenes of  religious life. In this picture, which is also  known as 'Tomorrow will be Friday', he shows a  group of Franciscans fishing. These friars, were  forbidden to eat meat on Fridays, in commemoration  of the day when Christ was crucified. In  'Thursday', Sadler wrote, 'The background was made  up from studies I had painted in Germany, with the  help of some foreground studies made in the  previous summer at Hurley on the Thames'. A  pendant to this picture in the Walker Art Gallery,  Liverpool, called 'Friday', shows the friars  enjoying their catch. The 1897 guide to the Tate  noted that this picture 'was one of three that  commenced Sir Henry Tate's collection'.
As this most recent work in the room shows, changes in Kounelliss practice over the years also carry continuities. He has been working with bells since the 1990s, often contrasting their elegance and precision with more haphazard forms. Here the ageing, rickety tables appear hardly able to sustain the accumulated weight of the bells. The stilling of the bells  especially those without tongues - may suggest a wider silencing of the many personal histories that the tables evoke.
Gallery label, February 2004
This work was originally made in plaster. 

The geometry of the form derives from the fact that the solid plaster was carved rather than modelled when still wet. This bronze was cast in the 1960s and the surface colouring (patination) was by Henry Moore.
Marlow Moss wrote, I am no painter, I dont see form, I only see space, movement and light. She adopted the three-dimensional relief form, perhaps as an escape from the black structural grids familiar from the paintings of artists like Piet Mondrian, initially working only in white. Here, the composition is controlled by the two planes of black, which counterbalance the vertical lines. 
The white three-dimensional lines create variations of light, and the glow of the yellow, walled in by the relief, casts a sheen onto 
the white ground.
Ferguson was born in Scotland, but seems to have trained in Holland, where he lived and married. He also travelled in France and Italy. This is typical of his many arrangements of dead game, although he also painted fanciful architectural subjects for overmantels and overdoors. Subjects such as these were admired as craftsmanlike renderings of nature, recalling a good day out hunting. Ferguson is known to have supplied a pair of such pictures specifically for the Duchess of Lauderdale's Private Closet at Ham House in the 1670s, indicating that they were considered particularly suitable as decoration for small, informal spaces.
Gallery label, February 2004
Gallery label, April 2005
Kitty Pearson was a flamboyant young graduate, who had recently studied painting at the Rhode Island School of Design. She later pursued a career as a writer. The setting for this portrait is the front room of Neels New York apartment, which also functioned as her studio. The domestic environment lends a note of incongruity to the sitters nudity.
Throughout his long career, Kokoschka developed a special affinity for riverscapes, painting river scenes in many major European cities, including Prague, Lyons, Dresden and Salzburg. He painted and sketched many river views of London from 1925 to the early 1970s, most frequently looking up or downstream from buildings near Waterloo Bridge. This view looks down river toward St Paul's Cathedral. Painted during a hot October, the artist's vantage point was the roof of the Shell-Mex building on the Strand. The picture was painted entirely on the spot without preliminary studies of any kind.
The artist rearranged the planned original installation and the work has since been shown in different configurations. Until the mid-1960s Bell concentrated on making works using a box format. In 1968 he said that what interested him most about his later boxes all seemed to happen in certain sections of the unit. By then he felt that this format had become an inhibiting factor which he had to destroy or pass beyond. He began to experiment with works of an environmental character and to create a space which people could walk around and into, and at the same time see through. However, in the interests of safety visitors must keep behind the barriers.
The individual titles of this series of paintings list the separate pigments used to make them. The paint layers can be seen at the edges. The artist says that these edges can be read ''almost like a bar code'', making it possible to ''uncover the history of each painting''. They come from a group of fifty such works, which trace the history of painting by classifying and indexing the development of artist''s pigments, from early cave paintings to the present day. The information is taken from a chart produced by the paint manufacturers Winsor & Newton.
From the 1950s onwards Ralph Rumney was involved with a number of different European avant-garde movements. In July 1957 he co-founded the Situationist International, an anarchist group that sought to overthrow capitalism through subversive cultural acts. The Change, painted early in 1957, is constructed from randomly applied dabs of paint and a loose grid of black lines. The combination of chance marks and the ordering device of a grid has been interpreted as a visual metaphor for the interaction of the subconscious and conscious, as well as the spiritual and material.
Joan Mir made the small Composition at Stanley William Hayters famous printing studio, Atelier 17, in New York in 1947. It extends some of the artists earlier imagery, particularly the moon and the truncated woman. It also shows the emergence of amoebic shapes that Mir first developed on this American trip and became typical of his subsequent imagery.
Gallery label, February 2004
This is thought to be the work of Gawen Hamilton who specialised in conversation pieces: small-scale paintings depicting family or friends, usually in informal surroundings. Here a group of gentlefolk enjoy a game of cards. Their status as patrons of the arts is suggested by the presence of an artist, his assistant carrying a folder of sketches, and by an allegory of 'Painting and Sculpture' hanging on the wall. In the left corner turned from the group, a small black page fetches a glass of wine from a wine cooler. In many conversation pieces black servants appear as silent shadowy figures, alienated from the life of the household, often depicted like pets or other possessions.
I developed bad lung trouble because I had been working a lot with fibreglass. [] I was isolated in a sanatorium for almost a year. [] As a result I developed totally different ways of making art. Thats when I started to produce my first body-sculptures. I could sew lying in bed. The idea was to work with the body having connections with another body. In fact, my tense relationship with performance art began at this time. (Rebecca Horn interviewed by Germano Celant in Rebecca Horn, exh. cat., New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1993, pp.26-7)
Although Piper is best known for his paintings of British landscape and architecture, he did venture further afield from the 1950s and 1960s, in particular to France and Italy. This painting was made after a visit to Rome in the early spring of 1961, and shows his reaction to the city. The details of the architecture are left vague, but a strong impression is created with the arrangement of geometric shapes and varied textures, combined with the warm bright colours of the Roman light.
This sculpture was a made as a preliminary study for a series of relief carvings for the exterior of the home of the collector Albert Barnes in Philadelphia, now housing the Barnes Foundation. The designs draw upon popular Cubist motifs, showing a guitar and an open book. The two eye shapes at top and bottom may reflect Lipchitzs interest in integrating the human figure with the instruments.
In 1967, Sonnier began to make works by painting latex directly onto the wall of the gallery and peeling most of it away. The latex remains attached along its top by its own stickiness and is sometimes (as here) pinned out from the wall. Red Flocked Wall was first made in Cologne in 1969 but is remade in situ each time it is displayed. Sonnier covers the final layer of latex with red painted sawdust. The work is a delicate membrane but has a very precise relationship to the space it occupies, since it is a cast of the gallerys wall.
The children in this portrait were the offspring of wealthy baronet and landowner Sir Edward Astley and his second wife Anne Milles. They are depicted at play on a classical terrace, reminiscent of the familys grand estate at Melton Constable, Norfolk. Anna Maria, who waves her brothers plumed hat above her head, died in childhood, the year after this portrait was painted. Edward, whose elder half-brother was to inherit his fathers title, lived to carve out a successful career as a soldier in the British army. It is thought that the portrait was commissioned by the childrens maternal grandfather.
Thomas Herring (1693-1757) was a typical success story of the eighteenth century, a politically active priest. Lucrative positions in the Church brought him wealth, and he ardently supported the Hanoverians, not only in his sermons, but by raising large sums of money for the government during the Scottish rebellion of 1745. His reward was being made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1747. When Hogarth painted this portrait
This work is one in a series of four models that Long made at this time. Two of the works were realistic miniature copies of locations he had physically mapped out; the other two represented imaginary sites. This piece is of an imaginary site on Dartmoor. Even though craft and imitation had been jettisoned by this generation of students, Long displayed a virtuosity in combining traditional materials with untraditional subject matter. While Long normally used natural materials situated outdoors, here he reconsiders the process by replicating the natural landscape for the studio or gallery environment.
This is from a series of works known as 'Hourloupe'. They are characterised by flat interlocking shapes and striated colouring, usually red, white and blue. The starting point for this style in Dubuffet's work was some doodles he made with ballpoint pens while talking on the telephone in July 1962. 'Hourloupe' is an invented word, which contains the idea of 'making a fool of' someone, or of making mistakes. The word 'loupe' means knob or gnarl. This picture seems to represent several figures in a landscape. One of them appears to be juggling.
This is one of a series of seascapes (labelled A-F) which Nolde painted while staying on the island of Sylt in northern Germany. His characteristically expressive brushwork and heightened colour suggest the seething turbulence of the sea. In his memoirs, he recalled I wanted to see the sea again in all its wild greatness. Thunderclouds came driven by hail-storms  lightning flashed into the sea  I had finished or almost finished six seascapes, whose paint was still wet, working on them in a state close to ecstasy.
This is an illustration for George Borrows novel of gipsy life, 1851. On the left is the hero, Lavengro, whose name translates from Romany as wordsmith. He is teaching Armenian to Isopel (on 

the right) in order to deflect her romantic interest in him. Nashs interest in this imaginative portrayal of the gypsy life reflects, perhaps, his romantic fascination with a lost, idyllic relationship with nature. A dingle is a deep, wooded valley.
This painting shows the view from the artist's studio in an eighteenth century house in east London. Eyton made a number of paintings of the view seen here, which includes a derelict house and a synagogue. This painting was worked on over a period of five years, during which time the view inevitably changed as houses were refurbished.  Eyton chose a large canvas because he wanted to express the immediacy of the scene. 'All the time I wanted it to be a true record about the houses opposite and what they looked like seen from one spot, in a particular grey light'. The frontality of the composition was influenced by his love of Italian Renaissance painting.
As a member of the National Fire Service, Rosoman had first-hand experience of fighting fires during German bombing raids. He was stationed in the East End of London, which was especially badly hit. He explained that Bomb Falling into Water was painted in 1942 when I was in the N.F.S. and was the result of night after night fighting fires in the London dock area  bombs were falling into the Thames and into the water in the docks.
While the sketches Turner made outdoors record the  landscape south of Snowdon, the studio work he  produced subsequently focuses on sites of historic  and literary resonance which lie adjacent to the  mountain and to the north. This move towards high  art is most apparent in his depictions of castles,  and narrative subjects, exhibited elsewhere in  this gallery. In the following four views,  however, it is the pictorial potential of natural  landscape features which is Turner's primary  concern. Forsaking topographical accuracy, these  studies are compelling experiments in idealised  landscape painting. They embody Turner's progress  beyond the conventions of tightly controlled  watercolour painting, and transcend Wilson's  influence in the production of powerful  atmospheric effects.
In 1932 Nicholson visited Paris and saw work by Joan Mir, Alexander Calder and Hans Arp.  He described their effect on him as a new freedom ... a kind of liberation. 

Incised lines dance into and along the surface of this painting. The lines are fluid, playful and largely non-descriptive (although outlines of bodies can perhaps be read into this painting).  Nicholson is occupied here with conveying the paintings status as a physical object. In discarding the need for representation, Nicholsons aim was to animate a thing, to create new life by marrying idea to a physical object.
At his death, Arnold Goodman was described  as 'for many years... Britain's most distinguished citizen outside government'. As a lawyer, his work on high-profile libel cases drew him into the affairs of state. In 1965 he was appointed chairman of  the Arts Council and made a life peer. This portrait was painted over at least two series of sittings,  at Sutherland's house in the South of France.  At this late stage in his career, Sutherland was applying paint with great fluency, but extremely thinly, over his characteristic grid of pencil lines.
Delvaux did not formally belong to the Surrealist movement. However, the dream-like atmosphere of his works, together with his erotic preoccupation with an ideal female figure, led to him being recognised as one of the leaders of Belgian Surrealism. The subject of this painting is the classical myth of the sexual encounter of Jupiter, disguised as a swan, and Leda. The story was part of the repertoire of traditional art and Delvaux has alluded to the works of past masters such as Raphael and Ingres in some details of the composition. However, the setting is an incongruously modern, urban landscape, which in its emptiness suggests strangeness and alienation.
This series of prints is based on a game called Exquisite Corpse, a version of Consequences which was developed by the Surrealists. The players take turns to draw part of a body onto a piece of paper, which has been folded horizontally to hide what the other players have drawn. The result is a body of composite parts. These etchings feature comic-horror imagery typical of the Chapmans work: skulls, eyeballs on stalks, grotesque animal heads, liquids dripping and spurting from wounds, orifices, nipples and heads, writhing intestines, and claw-like hands and feet.
'Anthony and Cleopatra' was painted in the artist's studio at Llaniestyn, North Wales in the winter of 1981-2. It contrasts with the densely worked surfaces of her paintings during the 1970s. Ayres has explained that she wanted to achieve a sense of the sublime through the scale of markings. It also differs from other paintings of the early 1980s in having a yellow ochre ground rather than a white ground. The reason for this was that she was snowed in for several days and was unable to purchase any white lead. As usual, the title was given after the painting was completed. Ayres's titles do not describe the subject of the paintings. Rather the titles have a 'resonance' which relates to the character of each work.
This is a portrait of the painter Emile Bernard. At the time it was done Bernard was still only a teenager, and was a student with Toulouse-Lautrec and Van Gogh at the Atelier Cormon in Paris. Like Gauguin, another of his friends, Bernard went on to develop a radical style of painting in his Breton scenes, for which he is now best known. Bernard later recalled that it took Toulouse-Lautrec thirty-three sittings to complete this picture, ten of which were devoted to working on the background.
Raedeckers paintings show alienated landscapes, devoid of human or animal presence. Using thread, wool and other textiles, he produces layered surfaces with a wide range of textures. While beautiful, Raedeckers enigmatic images are also strangely unsettling. His sombre colours  cool greys, muted blues, beiges and greens  create a melancholy mood. The absence of figures and lack of a clear narrative generates a feeling of anxious expectation, undermining the banality of his suburban iconography.
Gonzlez is regarded as the pioneer of welded iron sculpture. He learned oxyacetylene welding while working at the Renault car factory during the First World War. The tensile strength of iron allowed him to create three-dimensional forms without filling in the volume, an effect that he described as drawing in space. Many of his works show a concern with the human figure, often in a highly abstracted form. In this work, a cylindrical head is placed above a trapezium neck, with suspended triangles to indicate features.
Nicholson painted very few nudes, perhaps three  others only. He had been to art schools which were  not especially committed to life studies, unlike  the Slade School, and his pictures do not often  include large scale figures. In addition his  subjects were very personal, in that his  creativity was not in inventing new subjects but  in choosing them from real things around him. This  study of the nude was not exhibited in his  lifetime.
Venus, the most beautiful goddess and the goddess of love, herself fell in love with the huntsman Adonis. Grant uses the myth incidentally, to make a decorative painting from the idea of a female nude gazing after her departing lover, and to make a contrast between the way the old masters designed such a subject and his own more modern drawing of the figures.
Spencer's work frequently combined real and  imagined elements. As a result, his paintings have  a strong sense of narrative even if the subject is  not wholly explicable. He painted 'The Bridge'in a  temporary studio in the Fee School,Maidenhead. The  subject is believed to be spectators watching a  boat race, probably the annual Cookham Regatta.  They are standing on an invented stone bridge  instead of Cookham's cast-iron bridge, although  the decorative quatrefoil motifs are taken from  the metal version. The Airedale terrier dog lying  on the bridge was called Tinker and he belonged to  a Cookham resident, Guy Lacey, who taught Stanley  Spencer and his brother Gilbert to swim.
A woman is glimpsed quietly wiping her leg. The steadied pose and glowing treatment of the body capture the intimacy of everyday life. Bonnard's model was his companion, Marthe, whose body was regularly at the heart of his paintings and the apparent surreptitiousness may be understood as part of their daily relationship. Although her nakedness suggests sensuality, Marthe's prolonged bathing was linked to a tubercular (or possibly neurotic) condition.
This painting depicts a view of part of the garden  at the artist's home in Normandy. Beyond the wall  lie other houses in the village of Eragny. The  figure in the orchard is the artist's wife.  Pissarro was interested in the relationship  between man and his environment, and most of his  landscapes are peopled, or reflect a human  presence. Here the female figure complements the  quiet, domestic nature of the orchard scene. True  to the Impressionist principle of recording the  effects of light and atmosphere, Pissarro noted on  the back of this canvas that he had painted it  during mornings in October, between the hours of  10.00 and 12.30.
In 1938, Neel and her companion Jos Santiago moved from Greenwich Village to 107th
Street, then known as Spanish Harlem because of its Hispanic population. You know what I thought Id find there? she later said. More truth; there was more truth in Spanish Harlem. She often painted friends, neighbours and their children in the area. Neels interest in representations of masculinity is reflected in this portrait of two self-assured, streetwise boys. Their identical stances suggest both the assertiveness of adults and the vulnerability of children.
The themes of this work are changing human appearance, and the owner's own responsibility to complete the piece. It existed as a work in progress for ten years and was not complete until 1980. As the instructions printed on it show, it is a collaborative work between the artist, the current owner and the owners of the works directly preceeding it and directly following it in the series. This example belonged to the artist until it was sold to the Tate so he appears as an owner until 1974. The Tate is represented by a photograph of the current Chairman of the Tate Trustees during the six remaining years.
In 1811 Dr John Fisher introduced his nephew, John Fisher, to Constable. The younger Fisher became the artists closest friend, providing moral and financial support whenever they were needed and often purchasing works from Constable which he could ill afford. In 1819 Fisher became Vicar of Gillingham in Dorset and Constable was invited to stay there in 1820 and again in 1823. On the second occasion he painted this picture of the bridge with the village church beyond. Fishers son Osmond later recalled seeing Constable sitting with his easel in the meadow at the right hand corner.
This portrait is both a remarkable technical performance and a deliberately backward-looking souvenir. Mrs Huxley, the widow of the biologist T.H.Huxley, was the artist's mother-in-law (twice over, as after the death of his first wife he married her sister). In 1905 he had painted Mrs Huxley's portrait as a gift on her eightieth birthday. In 1927, when he was himself seventy-seven, he painted a replica at the request of Henry Tonks, who gave it to the Tate Gallery. The painting is in the manner of Holbein, even to the fabric of the dress and the panelling in the background. Tonks was a teacher at the Slade School, and his pupils had once been the avant-garde of London.
Wootton was greatly admired in his time for his landscapes, battle-scenes and sporting pictures. His abilities are well displayed in this large picture, where the imaginary landscape is not merely the backdrop to a sporting scene but becomes the dominant feature of the composition.The 'true blue' coats of the main sitters were worn by supporters of 'Bonnie Prince Charlie' and show them to be Jacobite sympathisers. However the Earl, shown in the centre on a chestnut horse, prudently avoided involvement in the last Jacobite uprising of 1745, the year after this painting was completed.
This is one of Flanagans first sculptural investigations of the hare motif, a subject that would come to dominate his work for the next thirty years. Flanagan saw the hare as a surrogate human figure (and even surrogate self-portrait) and as a shape-shifting trickster rich in mythological resonances. According to notes kept by Flanagan, this sculpture was gilded on the first full moon of 1980 (full moon and a lake are conducive to the laying of gold according to the Chinese), an expression of the magical and alchemical properties Flanagan held his work to possess.
Robertson Reid was one of several Scottish artists who lived in the south of England during the 1870s, and who revived an almost documentary manner of painting rural subjects. He painted this scene at Ashington in Sussex. Reid delighted in details of folk culture and the varied social strata of rural community life. Here he shows the villagers as a social unit, either playing or watching the cricket match. In fact the match itself is secondary to the interaction of a carefully staged group in the foreground, which includes local gentry, milkmaids and shepherds.
In his paintings of the early 1920s, Jack Yeats surveyed the character and activities of the ordinary people of Western Ireland. He used a bold drawing in outline that is almost caricature, which he then painted directly with strong colours. Here a man stares over the parapet of the bridge at Sligo into the muddy water of the river. His deportment and expression suggest a particular type of local character. Yeats grew up near Sligo, and knew the people well. In about 1925 Yeats took up a quite different manner of painting, with lighter colours, particularly blues, and looser shapes, and with imaginary subjects from Irish history.Jack Yeats was the younger brother of the poet W.B. Yeats.
In the summer of 1912 Gore went to stay in the new town of Letchworth. Here he painted some of the more avant-garde
This is a portrait of the painter Ron. B. Kitaj.  The painting consists of a field of green  diagonal stripes which partly obscure a view through a window into a small room. Within this space, a seated figure appears to be looking at another rectangular form, which could be either  a window or a painting. It is one of Hodgkin's earliest paintings on wood, a medium he uses  in order to give his paintings more of the quality  of solid objects.
Gallery label, September 2004
Bamborough Castle commands an imposing position on the Northumberland coast. Turner made his first drawings of it during his visit in 1797. This watercolour is one of several large studies of the castle, in all of which Turner has concentrated on the storm clouds in the distance, leaving blank the area intended for the castle. A finished watercolour of this subject exists in a private collection in America.
Arp felt that he could incorporate chance within artistic production, comparing the role of the artist to a plant bearing fruit. According to the Laws of Chance shows Arp playing with random composition, in this case dropping painted pieces of paper onto a surface. Torn Woodcut was made in a similar way in 1954, using the pieces of a Dada print he had made in 1920.
Hayter's interest in the combination of chance and spontaneous creativity is conveyed in the titles of these two works: Hunt the Needle and Myth of Creation. An element of controlled design is also evident, particularly in Hunt the Needle where a woman's anatomical features clearly emerge from the tangled lines. The prints demonstrate the technical refinement that  made Hayter one of the century's most innovative printmakers. His Paris workshop, Atelier 17,  was a focus for Surrealist experimentation,  and American artists drew upon his expertise when he established a workshop in New York  in the 1940s.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, November 2004
This portrait was painted the year the Tate Gallery was founded, and proved to be one of the most popular pictures on these walls at the beginning of the 20th century. Peacock was the darling of art critics at the onset of his career, but he never reached fame. His model, Ethel Brignall, was fourteen when he painted her. He married her sister Edith a few years later. The wooden panelling in the background of this portrait was used as a backdrop in most of Peacocks later portraits of children.
Scott spent a scholarship year in Berlin in 1963-4. According to him, the title for this painting, was chosen because it was one of a group of blue pictures started in Berlin and the particular blue pigment he used for them was discovered by him in that city. He commented that in this work the spatial relationships in his composition had become more symmetrical and Byzantine in origin. In the mid-1960s Scott simplified and clarified his paintings, using bolder shapes and eliminating textural contrasts. Paint was evenly and thinly applied, as here.
Cindy Sherman''s Bus Riders 1976/2000 are a series of photographs that feature the artist as a variety of meticulously observed characters. The photographs were shot in 1976 but not printed or exhibited until 2000 and are among the artist''s earliest work. Sherman uses elaborate costumes and make up to transform her identity for each image, but is photographed in a sparse, obviously staged setting with a wooden chair standing in for the bus seat.
The composition of this drawing is dominated by the word afro, and the flowing lines which emanate from it. Closer examination reveals that the word is composed of tiny drawings of heads. Ofili revels in such visual puns. Underlying this work is Ofilis response to the racist view that all black people look the same. The afro becomes a statement of black pride and, since each tiny head is different, a way to create individual portraits.
During the 1930s Weight was interested in fairy stories and images which kindled the imagination. 'Allegro Strepitoso' was inspired by memories of childhood visits to London Zoo accompanied by his mother. A photograph of Weight's mother adopting a position of agitation provided the pose for the lady in red. Weight wanted to execute a comic painting and became fascinated with making the lion appear to spring out of the cage. The title of the painting was suggested by a musical friend of the artist after it had been completed. Allegro means 'merry' or 'lively', while strepitoso means 'noisily'. The theme of attack and escape is one that runs throughout Weight's work.
Gallery label, September 2004
Gallery label, December 2004
In the late 1960s, Dibbets began to use photography to record and emphasise aspects of the geometry of landscape. This is one of a series of works depicting a beach in Holland in winter, when it was empty of visitors. Dibbets used a camera on a tripod and changed the angle by 15 degrees for each shot, then mounted the resulting photographs as a panorama. The title Dutch Mountain ironically relates to the apparently undulating forms that Dibbets created in the characteristically flat Dutch landscape.
Linders photomontages combine images from womens magazines and pornography to make powerful feminist statements, deconstructing media representations of women as ideals of femininity in the home or as consumable objects of male desire. She made them while studying Graphic Design in Manchester where she was involved with the punk scene. One of her photomontages shown here was used for the record sleeve of the Buzzcocks 1977 single Orgasm Addict. These works have much in common with the subversive practices of punk that was itself informed by the anti-establishment spirit of Dada.
This painting is of Pasmore's pregnant wife Wendy. The just detectable squaring-up marks and the precisely located bodily contours recall the fidelity to observation of the Euston Road School artists of whom Pasmore was a leading member. At the same time the freedom of touch in the bedclothes looks back to Pasmore's sensuous paintings in the mid-1930s. Both the clarity and the amplitude of the figure recall the nineteenth-century French painter Ingres, whose image Pasmore included in a later painting of a nude. Here, he was also painting in reaction to a nude by Renoir - 'I thought I'd do the subject, but without the sloppy sentiment. I thought I'd do someone in the family way, just sitting on a bed'.
Based in Los Angeles, Bell?s work reflects a preoccupation by some West Coast artists with light and space. The three boxes shown here demonstrate his various technical approaches to achieving their distinctive surfaces. The chequer-board pattern of Untitled (1962) was made by scraping away squares from a mirror, which he then painted black. The smoked effect on the four mirrored squares in the centre was achieved by applying a thin coating to the glass in a vacuum environment. The oval patterns of Untitled (1964) were made by covering the glass with a chemical treatment that cuts off certain bands of light, so that they appear in different colours depending on the viewing angle. Bell later abandoned patterned cubes in favour of plain glass ones, achieving a suffused effect by coating their surfaces  with a thin film of quartz and chromium, as  in Untitled (1967)
The text in this collage is part of a Heinz advertisement from a British magazine, which suggests that it may have been made after Schwitters arrival in Britain in 1940. Though the words remain legible, the work is resolutely abstract. A photograph of a woman in a hat has been obliterated by carefully matched segments, probably taken from the same page of the magazine.
Ziegler works within the tradition of landscape painting but his virtual reality terrains bear the hallmarks of the digital age. His scenes are designed on computer then transferred to the canvas as schematic drawings. These compositions become increasingly complex, offering the viewer a multitude of vanishing points. Here an ordered geometric system is disrupted by the unchecked dripping of areas of paint. The effects of light are also of particular interest to Ziegler. His use of reflective gold leaf in this work further complicates the paintings surface and distorts the viewers spatial perception.
This picture, painted towards the end of Nicholson's career, was exhibited in London at the Leicester Galleries in January 1941. Mushrooms were a favourite subject, which Nicholson had been painting since the 1920s.
Adonis was killed by a wild boar that he had been hunting. Venus, who was in love with him, arrived too late to save him. McKenna shows many details of the story: Cupid standing behind Adonis; the mother of Adonis, who had been turned into a tree, at the centre; and another hunting subject, the death of Actaeon, at the right. The hound in the foreground was borrowed from a painting by Stubbs.
Vorticism was a short-lived but radical movement that emerged in London immediately before the First World War. 'The vortex is the point of maximum energy', wrote the American poet Ezra Pound, who co-founded the Vorticist journal <i>Blast</i> with Wyndham Lewis in June 1914. The journal, opened with the 'Blast' and 'Bless' manifestos, which celebrate the machine age and Britain as the first industrialised nation. Edward Wadsworth was a contributor and painted this Vorticist abstract composition soon after. With its sharp diagonal lines converging towards a 'nodal point' it exemplifies Pound's definition of the Vortex as 'absorbing all that is around it in a violent whirling - a violent central engulfing'. The group's aggressive rhetoric, angular style and focus on the energy of modern life linked it to Italian Futurism, though it did not share the latter's emphasis on speed and dynamism. Other artists associated with Vorticism included William Roberts, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, CRW Nevinson and David Bomberg. The First World War demonstrated the devastating reality of pitting men against machines and Lewis's attempts to revive the movement in 1919 came to nothing.
This work was made by using a hole punch on foil sweet wrappers which Shimamoto then pasted down and washed with black ink. In this way, it combines new materials, textural possibilities and the trace of its making. Shimamoto was one of the original members of the Gutai Art Association, founded 1954, the name of which has been translated as embodiment with implications of direct expression. His practice encompassed performances and actions as well as paintings.
Gallery label, August 2004
Shannon painted this for an 'Exhibition of Fair Women', an annual show organised in London by the International Society of Painters. His sitter 'Mrs Pat' was well known as an actress. She was a friend of Shannon, and was then also working with his companion Charles Ricketts, who designed a production of 'Elektra' for her.
Known by their first names, Gilbert Proesch and  George Passmore began their artistic collaboration  over thirty years ago. In 1970 they began calling  themselves 'living sculptures' and made  themselves the primary subjects of their art.  Large-scale photographic works, made up of smaller  photographs structured into a regular grid, are  characteristic of their work of the last quarter  century. 'Happy' is from a series titled 'Modern  Fears' (1980-81). These works deal in a  pictorially heraldic way with everyday life,  fears, fantasies and moods of the artists. Here  they are presented as two gargoyles. Their  expressions are grotesque and irreverent.
Annlee You Proposes comprises both a virtual animated space and a physical architectural space. While it is possible to move and interact among the designed elements of furniture in the room, Ann Lees monologue alludes to another unreachable place beyond. Gillick likens the video element to a trailer, a clip for a longer narrative, setting into motion a sense of occupation and activity that runs before, during and after any visiting time. The sculptural furniture elements also posit a specific, but open-ended scenario, a series of possible movements or relations that could take place.
Topsy was William Morris's nickname;  'Ned' is short for 'Edward'. After moving  to London in 1856, Morris and Burne-Jones took over the rooms at Red Lion Square that Rossetti had shared with Walter Deverell (one of the original Pre-Raphaelites).  There were no furnishings, so Morris designed tables, chairs, cabinets and  a settle, which were made by a local carpenter. Rossetti described the results  as 'intensely mediaeval' and encouraged Burne-Jones and Morris to decorate the panels with their own paintings; Rossetti also provided designs himself. This growing interest in individual craftsmanship led  to the formation of Morris & Co in 1861.
The trial scene from Shakespeare's 'The Merchant of Venice' (Act IV Scene i) is based on an actual perfomance of the play at Covent Garden in 1768 - 9. All the actors are known. Charles Macklin (c.1699 - 1797) plays Shylock, shown here preparing to plunge his knife into the breast of Antonio, standing on the right, who is played by Matthew Clarke (fl.1755-83). Curiously, the seated figure in scarlet on the extreme left is not an actor, but the actual lord chief justice of the king's bench, Lord Mansfield (1705 - 1793). This unusual mixture of theatre and reality suggests that this portrait group was a special commission, perhaps from Lord Mansfield himself. The painting is unfinished.
Frank Lloyd Wrights striking spiral design for the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York was completed in 1959, and soon became a controversial icon of contemporary architecture. Hamilton came across some coloured postcards of the building which seemed to alter its character significantly,and embarked on his own series of variations on the theme. This work belongs to a sequence of six large reliefs, each using different colours. Its title refers to the use of pink, cream and green, associated by the artist with Neapolitan ice cream.
The individual titles of this series of paintings list the separate pigments used to make them. The paint layers can be seen at the edges. The artist says that these edges can be read ''almost like a bar code'', making it possible to ''uncover the history of each painting''. They come from a group of fifty such works, which trace the history of painting by classifying and indexing the development of artist''s pigments, from early cave paintings to the present day. The information is taken from a chart produced by the paint manufacturers Winsor & Newton.
This sculpture is carved from alabaster.  The softness of alabaster suits Hepworths organic forms and she exploited this characteristic to incise such details as facial features and abstract patterns.
On the night of 16 October 1834, the 

Houses of Parliament caught fire. Along 

with crowds of other astonished spectators, Turner made his way on to the river Thames in a boat to witness the spectacle of the conflagration. This vignette engraving, based on sketches taken that very night, appeared in The Keepsake, a successful 'pocket book' popular for its high quality illustrations and literary offerings. In this plate, the fire has entirely engulfed the Houses of Parliament although Westminster Abbey is still clearly visible beyond. The design was accompanied by verses 

recalling the events of the fateful night.
Mcwilliam was born in Northern Ireland and studied at the Slade School of Art, London. His first solo exhibition was at the London Gallery in 1939. In recent years McWilliam lived and worked in the Holland Park area. He was a good friend of the painter William Scott, and McWilliam made nude portrait busts of both William and his wife Mary. Mary Scott met her husband when she was a student at the Royal Academy Schools, where she studied sculpture. They both sat to McWilliam at the beginning of 1956, and he completed the portraits of them both in a week each.
These works are based on a media photograph of rapper Eminem. Havekost scanned the picture, manipulated its colours using photo editing software, and then used the resulting images as references from which to paint the scene by hand using a brush and a spray gun. The compositions are identical but with the tones reversed. Havekost has used the word ghost in the titles of several works depicting hooded or masked figures, reflecting his ongoing engagement with media depictions, and the process whereby the private individual vanishes and is replaced by the public persona.
Sickert's late portraits were nearly all executed from photographs. They were usually of public figures viewed informally, as in the portraits of Sir Alec Martin, his wife and their son. These paintings were all based on photographs taken by Sickert's wife, Thrse Lessore. Sir Alec, chairman of Christie's until 1958, was Sickert's friend and executor. In the early 1930s he had come to Sickert's aid financially.
Blamey has had a long teaching career, firstly at the Regent Street Polytechnic, then Chelsea School of Art and the Royal Academy Schools, where he was responsible for the teaching of life drawing. He has shown paintings of his family, and  commissioned portraits, at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition since 1938. This painting depicts his wife Margaret, who was one of his  students at the Regent Street Polytechnic. They married in 1948 and their only son, Stephen, was born in 1950. It was painted in their flat in Swiss Cottage. Blamey's work of the 1950s offers an emotional intensity generated by his closeness to the models, his handling of the relation of the  figures, and expressive distortions in perspective.
Much of Bourgeois' work is autobiographical, and relates to her traumatic childhood. She idolised her mother, and loathed her overbearing, adulterous father. Bourgeois made her first prints in the 1940s and, after a gap of about forty years, returned to printmaking in 1990. Frequently child-like in style, these works portray the events and fantasies of her childhood and adolescence. The scenes include the trauma of birth, the pubescent discovery of the body, the moulding of a daughter by her mother, and the stifling of a daughter by her father.
Lichtensteins series of prints based is on Claude Monet's series of Haystacks (1891), one of the seminal series of early modern art. In his original Impressionist paintings, Monet depicted a cluster of haystacks across various times of the day to draw attention to the dynamic relationship between colour and light. Similarly, Lichtensteins Haystacks run from morning (yellow) to midnight (black) in a mechanical version of Monet's changing light effects.
Born in Dublin, Davis came to England by 1837. He probably settled in Liverpool in the early 1840s, when he first exhibited at the Liverpool Academy. He began painting small-scale landscapes around 1853 and soon came under the influence of the Pre-Raphaelites, who were regular exhibitors at the Liverpool Academy. They (Rossetti and Ford Madox Brown in particular) in turn became great admirers of Davis's work. The landscape of Bidston Hill and Bidston Common, now part of Birkenhead, was a popular subject with Davis and other Liverpool Pre-Raphaelites, who appear to have valued it for its un-picturesque, down-to-earth character.
These prints are related to a series of Flower-Piece paintings made by Hamilton in the early 1970s. The flowers themselves were based on an image on a laminated postcard with an illusory three-dimensional effect. The addition of the Andrex toilet paper has been seen as counterbalancing the sentimentality inherent within the genre of painting flowers. It also reflects Hamiltons fascination with advertising. He has described a lyrical, soft-focus advertisement for Andrex as being like Watteau in its magical ambiguity.
Starr was a pupil at the Slade School in London in its early years. He was one of the chief exhibitors at the London Impressionists exhibition of 1889. In 1892 he emigrated to America, and became a successful painter and decorative designer in New York. When this portrait was shown at the New English Art Club in 1891, some reviews commented that it was a conscious homage to Whistlers similar portraits. This is evident in its title and design, and most fundamentally in its control of tone.
Turner painted this picture during his stay in Rome in 1828. More than most of his Italian landscapes, it describes the actual appearance of a particular place: Turner made several sketches of Orvieto on  his journey to Rome. However, the final painting blends this description with the compositions Turner admired in the work of the seventeenth-century  classical landscape painter, Claude Lorrain.
Turner painted this picture during his stay in Rome in 1828. More than most of his Italian landscapes, it describes the actual appearance of a particular place: Turner made several sketches of Orvieto on  his journey to Rome. However, the final painting blends this description with the compositions Turner admired in the work of the seventeenth-century  classical landscape painter, Claude Lorrain.
Gallery label, September 2004
The slate came from a quarry in mid-Wales which Long passed whilst completing a walk 'From the source of the River Severn to the summit of Snowdon, 60 miles'. In installing the work 214 stones are laid down in an arbitrary pattern within a circle drawn on the ground in pencil with a diameter of 6.60 metres. None of the stones touch and although they are selected at random the fairly even distribution of sizes and lengths is intentional.
Samuel Rogers (1763-1855), banker, poet, wit and celebrated host, guided the young Byron through the literary and political circles of London when Byron first arrived in the capital in 1811. He was also a friend of Turner, and the huge success of Turner's vignette illustrations to his poem 'Italy' (1830) established the artist's reputation as a book illustrator. Rogers's breakfast parties in St James's Place assembled men from many walks of life, and both Byron and Turner are included in this imaginary gathering of 1815. Mottram's print shows the social circle in which they would have met, if at all.
Drawing on memories from the artist's childhood, these works mimic photo spreads from the American magazine Life. The terse captions hint at the traumatic stories behind the images. Moffatt has commented: 'A person can make a passing comment to you when you are young and this can change you forever. You can be "scarred for life" but it isn't necessarily a bad thing. The photographs can be read as both tragic and comic - there is a thin line between both.'
Early in her career Ayres made work by pouring paint directly onto the canvas. Break-off comes from a time when she began to use a brush, arriving here at a greater sense of order and structure. Ayres observed of this development that to fill in a square is possibly not so real as to create a shape with a brush.
Millais first achieved fame and success as a member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. He always maintained close links with the Royal Academy, however, and became an Academician in 1863. Great natural talent, personal charm and the status of being a Royal Academician brought prosperity. In 1881 he acquired the lease and shooting rights of an estate at Murthly, Perthshire. This picture was painted during one of Millais' last visits there. The scenery inspired three large, sombre landscapes which were all painted during 1890-1. The view here is of Carnleth little bog which was a favourite refuge for hunted deer. The title is a quotation from Lord Byron's poem 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage'.
This work is typical of the small-scale single  figure or 'conversation piece' groups in which  Devis specialised all his life. His neat and  genteel style appealed greatly to the newly  enriched middle classes and country gentry, whom  he painted in elegant interiors or outdoors in  their parks. The identity of this particular lady  is not known but she is seated, presumably in the  grounds of her family estate, engaged in the  refined pursuit of music-making; her guitar lies  to one side, while she consults a sheet of music.  This combination of landscape and portraiture  influenced the young Gainsborough whose own  development of the style can be seen nearby.
Nauman has explained that these Studies for Holograms grew out of his performance works: 'The idea of making faces had to do with thinking about the body as something you can manipulate. I had done some performance pieces - rigorous works dealing with standing, leaning, bending - and as they were performed, some of them seemed to carry a large emotional impact. I was very interested in that: if you perform a bunch of arbitrary operations, some people will make very strong connections with them and others won't.'
Gallery label, August 2004
The view is inside the Grant family home at Streatley-on-Thames, painted when he was seventeen. In 1902 he went to the Westminster School of Art, overcoming his familys wish that he should join the army. Both his determination to pursue a career as an artist, and the quality of this very early painting, show his extraordinary talent. The colouring  controlled and yet rich  is comparable to recent work showing figures in interiors, perhaps most strongly those by Gwen John also shown in this room.
Hitchenss art typifies the fusion of modern painting principles and earlier British art. The sculptural blocks of colour indicate his interest in the work of Paul Czanne and the shallow space shows his debt to Georges Braque. The long, horizontal format and muted palette, however, link his work to the English landscape tradition of Gainsborough, Constable and Turner. This was painted in Sussex, which Hitchens would later make his home.
Gallery label, September 2004
Anthony, the hermit saint also known as Anthony the Great, was born in Upper Egypt. On the death of his parents he distributed his property among the poor and retired into the Egyptian desert where he remained in solitude for many years. Thus he is generally regarded as the founder of monasticism. Like other hermits, he was subject to vivid  hallucinations resulting from his austere lifestyle. These visions assume two forms in art, assault by evil spirits or erotic temptation. Roberts's painting focuses on Anthony's temptation by lust. Usually Anthony protects himself with a crucifix or by prayer, but here is seen shielding himself with his arms alone, his prayer books by his side.
This colour study is typical of the hundreds of experimental sketches 

that Turner habitually made as part of 

his process of painting in watercolour. He used them to test how his paper reacted to his colours, to lay out compositions, and to recreate atmospheric effects. Many were produced in batches, with Turner moving from sheet to sheet as 

if he was on a production line.
Gallery label, September 2004
Holst was the son of a Latvian music master who settled in London in 1807. In the 1820s he became a pupil of Fuseli, and like him specialised in literary subjects with an emphasis on the macabre and supernatural. This picture seems to relate to the legend of Faust, as retold by the German romantic playwright Goethe in his great poetic drama published in two parts in 1808 and 1832. Faust is a late medieval scholar with a thirst for ultimate knowledge who enters into a pact with the Devil, thereby pledging his soul. The daemonic figure to the left is perhaps identifiable as Faust's companion, Mephistopheles, an agent of Hell, perhaps participating in the witches' Sabbath during Walpurgis Night.
Like 'The Little Country Maid', this painting was executed while the artist lived near Pontoise, north-west of Paris. During the 1880s he became interested in painting rural market scenes, several of which were based on the markets at Pontoise and its neighbouring villages. Such subjects allowed Pissarro to combine the study of the human figure with depictions of outdoor scenes of everyday rural life. Although he wrote to his son Lucien that he wished the painting to have a 'certain naive freshness', hence the light and informal brushstrokes, the central figure of the 'charcutire' was painted from the model and the pose carefully studied.
Gallery label, September 2004
Flekkefjord is in Norway. It is not known why Gilman twice visited Scandinavia, in 1912 and 1913. It is possible that he went with the painter William Ratcliffe, who had family there. The visits were effectively working expeditions, and Gilman made many studies of towns and scenery. This bridge is painted accurately, but it is likely that Gilman chose the subject thinking of van Gogh's painting of a similar bridge in Provence. Gilman at first rejected Van Gogh's style, but later he came to admire him deeply. His friend Wyndham Lewis recalled that he had a number of Van Gogh postcards on his walls, and when he painted a picture that particularly pleased him, he would hang it next to them.
